Title: Object-Centric Environment Modeling for Agentic Tasks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.02846v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 00:25:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
## Object-Centric Environment Modeling for Agentic Tasks 

Yiyang Li 1, Tianyi Ma 1, Zehong Wang 1, Yijun Ma 1, Yanfang Ye 1† 

> 1

University of Notre Dame †Corresponding Author 

{yli62, yye7}@nd.edu § Code 

Abstract 

Large language model (LLM) agents can im-prove through accumulated experience, but free-form textual memories become difficult to maintain, validate, and reuse as interactions grow. Recent symbolic approaches learn exe-cutable skills or programmatic world models, yet often store local procedures or assume sim-plified dynamics. We propose Object-Centric Environment Modeling ( OCM ), which orga-nizes experience into an executable object-centric environment model. OCM maintains two connected code bases: object knowledge, which defines environment entities and mecha-nisms as Python classes, and procedure knowl-edge, which records reusable interaction pat-terns that must import and use the object model. OCM works in an online setting: after each episode, OCM reflects on the trajectory, up-dates both knowledge bases, and verifies that all procedures execute against the updated ob-ject model. During future interaction, the agent uses progressive knowledge disclosure to in-spect compact code signatures first and read source code only when needed. Experiments show that OCM achieves the best average rank across benchmarks and reduces invalid actions, demonstrating that agents can benefit from building object-centric environment models. 

1 Introduction 

As large language model (LLM) agents are increas-ingly deployed in interactive environments, their ability to learn from past experiences has become critical for solving long-horizon and open-ended tasks (Zhang et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025b; Ye et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025a,b). To enable agents to improve over time, prior work has introduced memory mechanisms that store and reuse previous experience as textual memory streams, verbal re-flections, or reusable workflows (Zhao et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024). Despite their effectiveness, textual knowledge becomes in-creasingly difficult to manage as agents accumulate 

Figure 1: Upper left : Isolated skills resemble scattered manuals whose assumed tools and parts are potentially inconsistent. Upper right : Monolithic symbolic world models resemble an overcomplicated machine that at-tempts to model all transitions. Bottom : OCM stan-dardizes objects and mechanisms first, then grounds procedural knowledge in this shared object model, mak-ing experience easier to organize, verify, and reuse. 

more interactions. Newly written knowledge may be redundant or inconsistent with previous ones, while large collections of textual knowledge are hard to validate or audit (Hu et al., 2025a; Chao et al., 2026). These limitations can make agent be-havior less controllable and less stable, especially in complex environments where errors in memory may propagate across future decisions (Xiong et al., 2025; Lam et al., 2026). To make accumulated experience easier to in-spect and reuse, a growing line of work repre-sents agent knowledge in symbolic or executable forms (Ning et al., 2026). These methods learn symbolic rules, code-based skills, or programmatic world models, improving interpretability and en-abling execution-based validation (Wang et al., 2023, 2025; Zheng et al., 2026). However, ex-

> arXiv:2607.02846v1 [cs.AI] 3 Jul 2026

isting approaches typically capture only one side of the desired structure. Code-based skill learning stores reusable procedures, but these procedures often remain local, without a shared account of the objects, states, affordances, and preconditions that make them valid (Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). Programmatic world-modeling methods instead aim to model environ-ment dynamics explicitly, but are usually studied in settings with smaller action spaces and well-specified states (Tang et al., 2024; Khan et al., 2025; Piriyakulkij et al., 2026). This leaves a missing middle ground: agents need symbolic knowledge that is more coherent than isolated skills, but less demanding than a monolithic transition model. Fig-ure 1 summarizes this tension. The key challenge is to organize experience around persistent environ-ment entities and mechanisms, so that procedural knowledge can be reused while remaining consis-tent with a shared object-level model. To address this gap, we propose Object-Centric Environment Modeling ( OCM ), a framework that enables an agent to construct and maintain an object-centric model of its environment through in-teraction. OCM represents the agent’s knowledge with two mutually connected code bases. The first, 

object knowledge , defines Python classes for the ob-jects in the environment; class attributes and meth-ods encode object properties and interaction mech-anisms. The second, procedure knowledge , stores interaction experience as executable Python files. Each procedure file describes a concrete piece of knowledge or experience, and must import and use the classes defined in object knowledge. After each interaction episode, the agent updates both forms of knowledge and executes the procedure files to check whether the accumulated knowledge remains mutually consistent, turning past experience into an auditable, executable, and object-grounded environ-ment model. During future interactions, the OCM agent can inspect the signatures of object classes and procedure functions and selectively read their source code. OCM encourages the agent to orga-nize knowledge around persistent entities and their interaction mechanisms, enabling more structured knowledge accumulation, self-consistency check-ing, and more controllable reuse of prior experience in complex environments. We evaluate OCM on three interactive bench-marks: ScienceWorld, ALFWorld, and PlanCraft. OCM achieves the best average rank among com-pared methods and reduces invalid actions. These results indicate that grounding procedural experi-ence in a shared object model helps agents accu-mulate reusable environment knowledge and act more reliably in complex interactive tasks. Our main contributions are as follows: • We propose object-centric environment model-ing , a framework that represents agent experience as an executable environment model composed of object knowledge and object-grounded proce-dure knowledge. • We introduce a continual learning loop that re-flects on completed trajectories, updates the object-centric code base, and verifies executable consistency before committing new knowledge. • We validate OCM on three interactive bench-marks and analyze how its learned knowledge improves performance and action feasibility. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Memory-Augmented Agents 

Memory mechanisms enable LLM agents to reuse past experience across long-horizon interac-tions (Kagaya et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025b). Most existing meth-ods store experience primarily as natural-language memories: Reflexion stores verbal feedback from previous trials to improve later attempts (Shinn et al., 2023); ExpeL extracts reusable lessons from successful and failed trajectories (Zhao et al., 2024); and Agent Workflow Memory abstracts trajectories into reusable workflows (Wang et al., 2024). These methods show that experience reuse can substantially improve agent behavior. But free-form textual memory is difficult to maintain as it grows, learned memories may become stale, re-dundant, or mutually inconsistent, and large mem-ory collections are hard to validate or audit (Hu et al., 2025a; Chao et al., 2026; Xiong et al., 2025; Lam et al., 2026). OCM shares the goal of contin-ual experience accumulation, but represents expe-rience as executable object-grounded code rather than only textual memory. 

2.2 Symbolic World Modeling 

Symbolic and executable representations provide a more structured substrate for agent knowledge. Prior work in object-oriented modeling represents environments through objects, attributes, relations, and transition mechanisms, enabling abstraction and transfer (Diuk et al., 2008; Kansky et al., 2017). Recent LLM agent methods similarly use symbolic programs to store reusable knowledge (Dainese et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2026; Zhao et al., 2026). For example, Voyager, Wall-E, and ASI accumulate executable skills in code (Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025); WorldCoder and PoE-World learn Python world models for plan-ning (Tang et al., 2024; Piriyakulkij et al., 2026). These approaches improve interpretability and en-able execution-based verification, but they typically focus on either local skills or world modeling in structured environments. In contrast, OCM cou-ples procedural experience with a shared object-centric code model that defines persistent entities and mechanisms. This encourages a unified, au-ditable, and self-consistent environment model that can be incrementally updated through interaction. 

3 Object-Centric Environment Modeling 

3.1 Preliminary Problem Formulation. We consider a partially observable interactive environment with observa-tion space O and action space A. An agent continu-ally interacts with the environment over a sequence of K task episodes {τk}Kk=1 . At step t in episode 

k, the agent observes okt ∈ O and selects an action 

akt ∈ A . The trajectory of episode k is denoted as 

Hk = ( ok 

> 0

, a k 

> 1

, o k 

> 1

, . . . , a kT , o kT ), where ok 

> 0

includes the initial task description. After the episode termi-nates, the agent receives a final reward Rk ∈ [0 , 1] .The goal is to maximize task success and cumula-tive reward PKk=1 Rk through continual interaction and knowledge accumulation. 

Knowledge Representation. OCM maintains an executable environment model consisting of two connected knowledge bases. The first is object knowledge , denoted Ko, implemented as a Python module that defines object classes and helper func-tions. These classes encode reusable entities in the environment, including their observable states, affordances, constraints, relations, and transition mechanisms. The second is procedure knowledge ,denoted Kp, implemented as a set of Python files. Each procedural file records one focused interac-tion pattern or experiential rule, such as when a mechanism applies, why an action succeeds or fails, or how feedback should be interpreted. A central constraint of OCM is that procedure knowledge must be grounded in object knowledge. A pro-cedural file is not allowed to stand as an isolated trajectory summary; it must import and use classes or functions from Ko. Thus, episodic experience is linked to persistent object-level abstractions rather than being stored as disconnected textual memo-ries or action scripts. Together, (Ko, K p) forms the agent’s object-centric environment model. 

Overview. During an episode k, if knowledge has been accumulated, the agent acts using the current environment model. The agent is given compact interfaces of Kko and Kkp : signatures of object classes and method functions, together with an index of procedural files and their public func-tions. These summaries expose the structure of the learned model without placing all accumulated source code into the prompt. After an episode ends, OCM updates its en-vironment model through two stages. First, an object-centric reflection stage converts the trajec-tory into a structured learning plan, identifying which reusable object mechanisms or procedural patterns may need to be created or revised. Sec-ond, a knowledge update stage generates concrete Python code for the planned changes and validates the resulting candidate knowledge base. An up-date is committed only if the candidate code is executable against the current object model. As illustrated in Figure 2, this yields a closed learning loop: future decisions are made from the current object-centric model; new feedback is reflected into the object-grounded model; and only executable updates that remain consistent with prior knowledge are incorporated. 

3.2 Object-Centric Knowledge Reflection 

The reflection stage converts a completed episode into a structured learning plan. Instead of directly rewriting the knowledge base from the raw trajec-tory, OCM first decides what should be learned. This separation prevents incidental episode details, such as transient locations, repeated invalid actions, or task-specific action sequences, from being stored as long-term knowledge. Given the trajectory Hk, task results Rk, the ob-ject signatures Sig( Kko ), and the procedural index 

Ind( Kkp ), the reflection model produces 

P k = Reflect 



Hk, R k, Sig( Kko ), Ind( Kkp )



=



P ko , P kp , I ko , I kp



.

Here, P ko and P kp specify planned updates to ob-ject knowledge and procedure knowledge, while In kitchen, you               

> see: a stove, …, a
> metal pot, …
> inspect[
> Stove ,MetalPot ,
> boil_substance.py
> ]
> Action: move metal
> pot to stove
> Object
> Knowledge
> Procedure
> Knowledge
> Signatures
> class Stove :
> <source_code >
> class MetalPot :
> <source_code >
> Trajectory Knowledge
> Object Updates
> Inspect Objects
> Procedure Updates
> Inspect Procedures
> Update Plan
> 1. Reflection
> Inspected Codes Updated Codes
> 2. Update
> Updated Knowledge
> from obj_k import
> Stove ,MetalPot , …
> def boil_substance () :
> class Object :
> def procedure() :
> class Object :
> def procedure() :
> Verified Knowledge 3.Verification
> Merge

(a) Progressive Knowledge Disclosure (b) Object -Centric Environment Modeling   

> On Episode After Episode
> Object Codes Procedure Codes

Figure 2: Overview of OCM. (a) During an episode, the agent uses progressive knowledge disclosure: it first observes signatures of learned object and procedure codes, then selectively inspects relevant source code before choosing an environment action. (b) After each episode, OCM converts the trajectory into an object-centric update plan, generates new candidate object and procedure code, and commits the update only after verification, where all procedure files must execute successfully against the updated object code. By grounding procedure knowledge in shared object knowledge, OCM maintains an executable and auditable environment model for future interactions. 

Iko and Ikp specify object symbols and procedural files whose source code should be inspected be-fore editing. The plan is constrained to contain only reusable mechanisms or decision patterns sup-ported by the episode. Object updates should de-scribe recurring environment mechanisms, such as object states, affordances, preconditions, effects, or relations. For example, the agent should learn that closed containers must be opened before their contents are accessible, rather than memorize that a particular cabinet was closed in one episode. Proce-dure updates, in turn, must be explained through the object model: a procedural pattern should identify which object classes or methods determine when the pattern applies and why it succeeds or fails. The inspection fields connect new evidence to prior knowledge. If the episode appears to revise an existing class, function, or procedural pattern, OCM retrieves the corresponding source code be-fore generating an update. The agent therefore sees both the new trajectory evidence and the relevant old implementation, reducing accidental duplica-tion and making revisions local. Reflection thus acts as a routing mechanism: it filters noisy experi-ence into a small set of object-grounded learning targets and identifies the prior code that those tar-gets must remain compatible with. 

3.3 Object-Centric Knowledge Update 

Given the reflection plan, OCM generates concrete Python code. The agent receives the plan P k, the trajectory Hk, task results Rk, and the inspected source code Sk = Src( Iko , I kp ). It outputs the can-didate object and procedure code: 

(∆ Cko , ∆Ckp ) = Update( P k, H k, R k, S k).

Object updates ∆Cko are merged into Kko . New top-level definitions are appended, while updated definitions replace existing definitions with the same name. This allows the object model to evolve as new evidence accumulates while keeping a sin-gle shared namespace for environment entities and mechanisms. The resulting object module is then compiled as part of validation before it can affect future decisions. Procedural updates ∆Ckp are stored as separate Python files. Each procedural file must encode one focused interaction pattern and must import and use relevant symbols from Kko . A procedure may de-fine workflows, rules, failure patterns, heuristics, or recovery principles. It must not define a complete action controller or replay an entire trajectory. This restriction distinguishes procedure knowledge from executable policies: procedures explain reusable mechanisms and decision patterns, but they do not directly control the agent. Before committing a candidate update, OCM verifies that the full procedural knowledge remains executable against the candidate object knowledge: 

Verify( eKo, eKp) = ^ 

> p∈eKp

Exec( p | eKo).

Here, Exec( p | eKo) returns true only if procedure 

p executes successfully. Every procedure file in the current candidate knowledge base ( eKo, eKp)

must execute successfully using the updated ob-ject knowledge. If verification fails, the error is returned to the update model for another attempt; otherwise, the candidate is committed. This verifi-cation step does not prove that the learned model is semantically complete or always correct. Instead, it enforces a practical invariant: every committed procedure remains executable against the current object knowledge base. As a result, local update errors are less likely to silently corrupt future de-cisions, and the accumulated environment model remains auditable as ordinary source code. 

3.4 Progressive Knowledge Disclosure 

The same object-centric structure used for learn-ing also controls how knowledge is exposed during future decision-making. Placing all accumulated code into every prompt would be expensive and dis-tracting. OCM instead exposes a compact interface first, and reveals source code only when needed. At step t of episode k, the decision context is 

C(0)  

> t

=

h

I, o kt , H k<t , Sig( Kko ), Ind( Kkp )

i

,

where I is the benchmark instruction, okt is the new observation, and Hk<t is the trajectory so far. The object signatures expose public classes, methods, functions, and docstrings from Kko ; the procedural index lists procedural files and their public func-tions. These summaries provide enough informa-tion for the agent to recognize potentially relevant knowledge without loading the entire knowledge base into context. When the agent needs implementation details, it may issue an internal inspection request q of the form Inspect[...] instead of an environment ac-tion. OCM retrieves the matching object definitions or procedural files and expands the context: 

C(1)  

> t

= C(0)  

> t

⊕ Src 



Retrieve( q; Kko , K kp )



.

Inspection is internal and bounded: if no matching code is found, the agent is informed that inspection failed; if the inspection budget is exhausted, it must produce an environment action. Progressive disclosure prevents the growing knowledge model from overfilling the context win-dow. Reflection and update organize experience into object classes and focused procedural files; sig-natures and indexes expose the high-level structure of that model; inspection reveals implementation details only when they are relevant to the present decision. Thus, OCM can reuse an expanding body of learned knowledge while preserving the scala-bility, auditability, and consistency benefits of an executable object-centric environment model. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setting Benchmarks. We evaluate OCM on three interac-tive agent benchmarks: ScienceWorld (Wang et al., 2022), ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2020), and Plan-Craft (Dagan et al., 2024), which respectively cap-ture challenges in grounded scientific reasoning, embodied household interaction, and structured crafting dynamics. To ensure a fair comparison and control computational resources, we sampled five tasks from each of 30 ScienceWorld task categories as test data. Meanwhile, we used the unseen split for ALFWorld and the test (small) split for Plan-Craft. More details are provided in Appendix A.1. 

Baselines. We compare OCM with standard in-teractive agents, including ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023); memory-augmented agents, including Expel (Zhao et al., 2024) and AWM (Wang et al., 2024); and symbolic-learning or world-modeling agents, including ASI (Wang et al., 2025), WorldCoder (Tang et al., 2024), and Wall-E (Zhou et al., 2024). All methods are evaluated in the same online setting: agents process episodes sequentially and may update their memory or learned knowledge after each episode, but receive no offline training data or benchmark-specific demonstrations. We use GPT-4.1-mini as the backbone LLM (OpenAI, 2025). More imple-mentation details are provided in Appendix A.2. 

Metrics. We report success rate (SR), average re-ward, average environment steps, and average rank (A.R.) across benchmark metrics. For PlanCraft, we additionally report results by difficulty level. To analyze interaction quality, we measure the number of invalid actions rejected by the environment. Method ScienceWorld ALFWorld PlanCraft A.R. SR Reward Steps SR Steps Easy Med. Hard Overall Steps 

ReAct 20.8 43.3 46.7 29.9 39.8 50.0 40.0 0.0 41.0 7.3 4.90 Reflexion 32.2 49.6 50.9 30.6 17.2 67.5 35.0 5.4 47.0 8.4 2.95 Expel 30.2 52.3 40.6 60.1 30.6 47.5 30.0 2.7 36.8 13.1 4.15 AWM 33.6 50.1 39.0 37.3 40.4 40.0 5.0 2.7 29.9 12.9 4.85 ASI 26.9 49.1 52.8 10.5 47.0 50.0 50.0 5.4 40.2 12.7 5.15 WorldCoder 24.2 44.4 53.5 25.4 43.1 52.5 20.0 8.1 36.8 16.7 5.70 Wall-E 23.7 44.1 52.3 27.6 42.7 50.0 5.0 2.7 34.2 17.2 6.55 

OCM 34.8 57.7 40.1 41.7 34.5 62.5 55.0 8.1 49.6 8.8 1.75 

Table 1: Performance and Average Ranking Comparison. Results are reported on ScienceWorld, ALFWorld, and PlanCraft. SR means Success Rate. The best and second-best performances are highlighted in Bold and Underline .0 1 2 5 10 20 50 100      

> Invalid actions per task
> OCM
> AWM
> Expel
> Reflexion
> ReAct
> ASI
> WorldCoder
> 4.0
> 6.8
> 8.6
> 11.7
> 12.3
> 14.9
> 17.5
> ScienceWorld
> 012510 20
> Invalid actions per task
> OCM
> Expel
> AWM
> ReAct
> ASI
> Reflexion
> WorldCoder
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 1.1
> 1.2
> 2.3
> 3.6
> PlanCraft

Figure 3: Distribution of invalid actions across ScienceWorld and PlanCraft. Each violin shows the per-task distribution of invalid actions for one method, with the x-axis plotted on a log(1 + x) scale to reduce the effect of long-tailed failures. Black dots mark medians, horizontal black bars mark interquartile ranges, and numeric annotations report mean invalid actions per task in the original scale. OCM yields the lowest mean invalid-action count on both benchmarks, suggesting that object-centric environment modeling improves action feasibility. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 1 shows that OCM achieves the best aver-age rank across the three benchmarks, indicating consistent gains across different environment fami-lies. The improvement is greatest on ScienceWorld and PlanCraft, where success depends heavily on reusable object mechanisms and state transforma-tions. On ScienceWorld, OCM obtains the highest success rate and reward while using a competitive number of steps. This suggests that object-centric knowledge helps the agent reuse recurring mecha-nisms such as containment, heating, cooling, and material transformation, rather than relying only on task-specific experience. PlanCraft provides a complementary test of structured transformation knowledge. OCM achieves the best overall success rate, with especially clear gains on medium tasks. Easy tasks can often be solved by direct reasoning or short-horizon search, but harder recipes require tracking intermediate dependencies and avoiding invalid operations. The stronger gains in these set-tings are consistent with the design of OCM, which can represent materials, tools, and transformations as reusable object-centered knowledge. Results on ALFWorld are more mixed: OCM is competitive but does not outperform all baselines. This sug-gests that the benefits of object-centric modeling are most pronounced when transfer requires ex-plicit mechanisms. In benchmarks dominated by high-level household routines, textual experiential lessons may already provide strong guidance. 

4.3 Learning Dynamics 

Figure 4 examines how performance evolves over the online evaluation process. On ScienceWorld and PlanCraft, OCM maintains a stronger cumu-lative performance curve over time, suggesting that its learned knowledge remains useful as more episodes are processed. This is important for on-line agents, where accumulated memory can easily 0 50 100 150                          

> Episode
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Cumulative reward
> ScienceWorld Reward
> 40 20 020 40
> Task count
> ReAct
> WorldCoder
> ASI
> Expel
> Reflexion
> AWM
> 35 14
> 29 13
> 36 24
> 30 23
> 32 28
> 24 22
> ScienceWorld Win/Loss
> 050 100 150
> Episode
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> Cumulative count
> ScienceWorld Knowledge
> Objects
> Procedures
> 050 100
> Episode
> 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%
> Cumulative success rate
> easy med. hard imposs.
> PlanCraft Success Rate
> 20 020
> Task count
> AWM
> Wall-E
> Expel
> WorldCoder
> ASI
> ReAct
> Reflexion
> 26 3
> 25 7
> 21 6
> 23 8
> 18 7
> 17 7
> 16 13
> PlanCraft Win/Loss
> 050 100
> Episode
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> Cumulative count
> PlanCraft Knowledge
> Objects
> Procedures
> (a) Cumulative performance (b) Paired win/loss (c) Knowledge growth
> OCM Reflexion ReAct Expel AWM ASI WorldCoder Wall-E

Figure 4: Analysis of OCM across ScienceWorld and PlanCraft. (a) Cumulative performance over the online evaluation sequence, measured by reward on ScienceWorld and success rate on PlanCraft. (b) Paired win/loss comparisons between OCM and each baseline on the same task instances. Bars to the right indicate tasks solved by OCM but not the baseline, while bars to the left indicate the opposite. (c) Growth of OCM’s environment knowledge over time. Object and procedural entries both expand throughout evaluation, showing that OCM accumulates reusable environment structure rather than relying only on per-task reflection. 

become noisy, redundant, or overly specific. The paired win-loss comparison compares methods on the same task instances. Across both benchmarks, OCM solves more tasks that each baseline fails to solve than vice versa. This indicates that the aggregate gains are not driven by a small number of outlier tasks, but reflect broader improvements across the evaluation set. The knowledge-growth curves further show that both object knowledge and procedure knowledge continue to expand dur-ing evaluation. This supports the intended division of labor: object knowledge captures reusable enti-ties and mechanisms, while procedure knowledge records focused ways of applying them. 

4.4 Action Validity Analysis 

Final success alone does not fully characterize agent behavior, since an agent may eventually solve a task after many invalid or unproductive actions. Figure 3 therefore measures invalid actions at the task level. OCM has the lowest mean invalid-action count on both ScienceWorld and PlanCraft, indicat-ing that its learned knowledge improves not only task completion but also action feasibility. This result is closely aligned with the method design. Workflow-based memories can still fail when their implicit preconditions do not match the current state. OCM reduces this risk by grounding procedural knowledge in shared object definitions and exposing object signatures during action selec-tion. As a result, the agent can better reason about affordances and preconditions before acting. 

4.5 Ablation Study 

Table 2 isolates the contribution of the main com-ponents of OCM on PlanCraft. Removing object knowledge reduces the success rate, showing that procedural experience alone does not fully capture the reusable structure of crafting tasks. Without a shared object model, learned procedures are less re-liably grounded in environment constraints. Remov-ing procedure knowledge also hurts performance and increases invalid actions. This indicates that object knowledge alone is not sufficient: object classes encode affordances and mechanisms, but the agent still benefits from procedure files that summarize recurring ways of applying them. The two knowledge bases therefore play complemen-class PinkTerracotta :               

> def crafting_requirements () :
> # All slots except B2 require terracotta, B2 requires pink dye
> requirements ={slot :{'type': 'terracotta', 'quantity': 1}for slot in [
> 'A1', 'A2', 'A3', 'B1', 'B3', 'C1', 'C2', 'C3’ ]}
> requirements ['B2' ]={'type': 'pink_dye', 'quantity': 1}
> return requirements
> def can_be_crafted (inventory ,crafting_grid ):
> """Checks if pink terracotta can be crafted given the current inventory and crafting grid state.
> """
> ...

Figure 5: Example of Object-Centric Knowledge Update. From a successful PlanCraft trajectory for crafting 

pink_glazed_terracotta , OCM extracts object knowledge for the intermediate pink_terracotta recipe. 

Variants PlanCraft SR Steps Invalid OCM 49.6 8.8 3

– w/o Ko 44.4 9.5 6– w/o Kp 45.3 9.7 33 – w/o verification 39.3 6.5 4

Table 2: Ablation results of OCM on PlanCraft. 

tary roles. The no-verification variant suffers the largest drop in success rate. During online interac-tions, unverified updates can persist across future episodes and mislead later decisions. Verification helps prevent this by requiring newly written pro-cedures to execute successfully against the current object knowledge before they are committed. 

4.6 Case Study 

We further examine how OCM turns a suc-cessful interaction into reusable knowledge on a PlanCraft task whose goal is to craft 

pink_glazed_terracotta . The initial inven-tory contains terracotta and pink_dye , but the target item is not directly craftable from these ingredients. The successful trajectory there-fore has two stages: the agent first fills the crafting grid with terracotta in every slot ex-cept the center slot B2 , places pink_dye in 

B2 , obtains pink_terracotta from the output slot, and then smelts pink_terracotta into 

pink_glazed_terracotta . This trajectory is use-ful because it contains both a recipe and a state transformation, rather than a single isolated action. After the episode, OCM writes object knowledge that makes the intermediate object explicit. As il-lustrated in Figure 5, the learned PinkTerracotta 

class defines crafting_requirements() ,which records the exact slot-level recipe, and 

can_be_crafted() , which checks whether the inventory and crafting grid satisfy those requirements without extra misplaced items. It also writes PinkGlazedTerracotta , which records that pink_terracotta is the smeltable precursor. These object definitions separate stable environment mechanisms from the particular episode in which they were observed. OCM also writes procedure knowl-edge grounded in those objects. The 

craft_pink_terracotta procedure imports 

PinkTerracotta , uses its requirements to detect missing slots, wrong item types, insufficient quantities, and unexpected extra items, and records recovery principles for repairing the grid. The smelt_pink_terracotta procedure imports PinkGlazedTerracotta and encodes the precursor-to-output transformation. Both procedures include verifier tests, such as checking that a correct grid passes can_be_crafted() , and that a grid with an extra wrong item fails. This case illustrates the central benefit of object-centric modeling: the learned knowledge is not merely “craft pink terracotta before smelting,” but an executable account of the object constraints, failure modes, and transformation preconditions that make the experience reusable. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented OCM, a framework for organizing in-teractive agent experience as an executable object-centric environment model. By grounding proce-dural knowledge in shared object definitions and verifying updates before committing them, OCM supports more structured, reusable, and auditable experience accumulation than free-form memories or isolated skills. Experiments across three bench-marks show that OCM improves overall perfor-mance and reduces invalid actions, suggesting that object-centric executable modeling is an effective substrate for online agent learning. Acknowledgements 

This work was partially supported by the NSF un-der grants IIS-2533550, IIS-2321504, IIS-2217239, CNS-2426514, and CMMI-2146076, Notre Dame Strategic Framework Research Grant (2025), and Notre Dame Poverty Research Package (2025). Any expressed opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors. 

Limitations 

OCM has several limitations that suggest direc-tions for future work. First, our experiments fo-cus on text-based interactive environments with relatively stable object types, action interfaces, and transition mechanisms. This setting is well aligned with object-centric modeling, but future work could study how to extend OCM to more open-ended, multimodal, or dynamically changing environments where object boundaries and affor-dances are less explicit. Second, OCM verifies executable consistency rather than providing a formal guarantee of seman-tic correctness. The current verification step en-sures that procedural knowledge remains runnable against the object knowledge base, which is use-ful for maintaining an auditable code model, but it does not prove that every learned mechanism is complete or universally correct. Future work could incorporate stronger automatically generated tests, counterexample search, or environment-grounded validation to further improve semantic reliability. Third, OCM introduces additional computation for reflection, knowledge updating, inspection, and verification. Although progressive knowledge dis-closure reduces the need to place the full accumu-lated code base into every prompt, the framework still requires extra LLM calls after episodes and oc-casional source-code inspection during interaction. Improving the efficiency of OCM is an important practical direction. Finally, the quality of the learned object and procedure knowledge depends on the backbone model’s ability to abstract reusable mechanisms from trajectories and write coherent code. Future work could evaluate how OCM scales across model families, model sizes, and more constrained code-generation settings. 

Ethical Considerations 

This work evaluates LLM agents in controlled sim-ulated environments and does not involve human subjects, user studies, personal data, or sensitive real-world applications. The proposed framework concerns the organization and verification of accu-mulated agent knowledge rather than deployment in high-stakes settings. We therefore do not iden-tify direct ethical concerns beyond standard risks of LLM-based agents, such as imperfect reason-ing or incorrect actions, which are limited here to benchmark environments. 

References               

> Hanxiang Chao, Yihan Bai, Rui Sheng, Tianle Li, and Yushi Sun. 2026. Stale: Can llm agents know when their memories are no longer valid? arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06527 .Chaoran Chen, Zhiping Zhang, Bingcan Guo, Shang Ma, Ibrahim Khalilov, Simret Gebreegziabher, Yan-fang Ye, Ziang Xiao, Yaxing Yao, Tianshi Li, and 1 others. 2025a. The obvious invisible threat: Llm-powered gui agents’ vulnerability to fine-print injec-tions. In Soups . The Twenty-First Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS). Chaoran Chen, Daodao Zhou, Yanfang Ye, Toby Jia-jun Li, and Yaxing Yao. 2025b. Clear: Towards contex-tual llm-empowered privacy policy analysis and risk generation for large language model applications. In
> Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , pages 277–297. Minghao Chen, Yihang Li, Yanting Yang, Shiyu Yu, Binbin Lin, and Xiaofei He. 2024. Automanual: Con-structing instruction manuals by llm agents via inter-active environmental learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:589–631. Gautier Dagan, Frank Keller, and Alex Lascarides. 2024. Plancraft: an evaluation dataset for planning with llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.21033 .Nicola Dainese, Matteo Merler, Minttu Alakuijala, and Pekka Marttinen. 2024. Generating code world mod-els with large language models guided by monte carlo tree search. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 37:60429–60474. Carlos Diuk, Andre Cohen, and Michael L Littman. 2008. An object-oriented representation for efficient reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning , pages 240–247. Yuanzhe Hu, Yu Wang, and Julian McAuley. 2025a. Evaluating memory in llm agents via incre-mental multi-turn interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05257 .

Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, and 1 others. 2025b. Memory in the age of ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 .Tomoyuki Kagaya, Thong Jing Yuan, Yuxuan Lou, Jayashree Karlekar, Sugiri Pranata, Akira Kinose, Koki Oguri, Felix Wick, and Yang You. 2024. Rap: Retrieval-augmented planning with contextual mem-ory for multimodal llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03610 .Ken Kansky, Tom Silver, David A Mély, Mohamed Eldawy, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Xinghua Lou, Nim-rod Dorfman, Szymon Sidor, Scott Phoenix, and Dileep George. 2017. Schema networks: Zero-shot transfer with a generative causal model of intuitive physics. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1809–1818. PMLR. Zaid Khan, Archiki Prasad, Elias Stengel-Eskin, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. 2025. One life to learn: Inferring symbolic world models for stochastic envi-ronments from unguided exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12088 .Chingkwun Lam, Jiaxin Li, Lingfei Zhang, and Kuo Zhao. 2026. Governing evolving memory in llm agents: Risks, mechanisms, and the stability and safety governed memory (ssgm) framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11768 .Xuying Ning, Katherine Tieu, Dongqi Fu, Tianxin Wei, Zihao Li, Yuanchen Bei, Jiaru Zou, Mengting Ai, Zhining Liu, Ting-Wei Li, and 1 others. 2026. Code as agent harness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18747 .OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-4.1 in the API. Blog post. Accessed: 2026-05-14. Top Piriyakulkij, Yichao Liang, Hao Tang, Adrian Weller, Marta Kryven, and Kevin Ellis. 2026. Poe-world: Compositional world modeling with products of programmatic experts. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 38:26609–26638. Jie-Jing Shao, Haiyan Yin, Yueming Lyu, Xingrui Yu, Lan-Zhe Guo, Ivor Tsang, James Kwok, and Yu-Feng Li. 2026. Lifting traces to logic: Pro-grammatic skill induction with neuro-symbolic learn-ing for long-horizon agentic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01293 .Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8634–8652. Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. 2020. Alfworld: Aligning text and em-bodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768 .Hao Tang, Darren Key, and Kevin Ellis. 2024. World-coder, a model-based llm agent: Building world mod-els by writing code and interacting with the environ-ment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:70148–70212. Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 .Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2022. Scienceworld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11279–11298. Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Graham Neu-big, and Daniel Fried. 2025. Inducing program-matic skills for agentic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06821 .Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. 2024. Agent workflow memory. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07429 .Zidi Xiong, Yuping Lin, Wenya Xie, Pengfei He, Zirui Liu, Jiliang Tang, Himabindu Lakkaraju, and Zhen Xiang. 2025. How memory management impacts llm agents: An empirical study of experience-following behavior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16067 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Yanfang Ye, Zheyuan Zhang, Tianyi Ma, Zehong Wang, Yiyang Li, Shifu Hou, Weixiang Sun, Kaiwen Shi, Yijun Ma, Wei Song, and 1 others. 2025. Llms4all: A review of large language models across academic disciplines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19580 .Zeyu Zhang, Quanyu Dai, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model-based agents. ACM Transac-tions on Information Systems , 43(6):1–47. Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 19632–19642. Hongyu Zhao, Siyu Zhou, Haolin Yang, Zengyi Qin, and Tianyi Zhou. 2026. Neuro-symbolic synergy for interactive world modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10480 .Yuhao Zheng, Li’an Zhong, Yi Wang, Rui Dai, Kaikui Liu, Xiangxiang Chu, Linyuan Lv, Philip Torr, and Kevin Qinghong Lin. 2026. Code2world: A gui world model via renderable code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09856 .Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelli-gence , volume 38, pages 19724–19731. Siyu Zhou, Tianyi Zhou, Yijun Yang, Guodong Long, Deheng Ye, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. 2024. Wall-e: World alignment by rule learning improves world model-based llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07484 .

A Experimental Details 

A.1 Benchmark Details 

Table 3 summarizes the evaluation splits used in our experiments. ScienceWorld contains 30 task cate-gories, and we sample up to five test instances from each category. The identify-life-stages-2 

category contains only four available instances un-der our filtering, resulting in 149 ScienceWorld tasks in total. For ALFWorld, we use the out-of-distribution evaluation split. For PlanCraft, we use the test-small split, which preserves the bench-mark’s difficulty structure while keeping online evaluation computationally tractable. In all bench-marks, episodes are evaluated in the benchmark’s default task order without reordering, curriculum design, or task-order tuning.             

> Benchmark Evaluation split #Tasks Step limit ScienceWorld Sampled test 149 100 ALFWorld OOD eval 134 50 PlanCraft Test-small 117 30
> Table 3: Evaluation splits used in our experiments.

PlanCraft overall results include easy, medium, hard, and impossible tasks. Impossible tasks are instances where the target item cannot be synthe-sized from the available inventory and recipes; on these tasks, the episode is counted as success-ful if the agent correctly uses the impossible ac-tion. PlanCraft exposes five high-level action types: 

move , smelt , think , search , and impossible .The move action transfers item stacks among in-ventory, crafting-grid, and output slots; smelt 

applies furnace-like transformations; search re-trieves recipe information; and impossible lets the agent declare that the target item cannot be crafted from the available resources. The think ac-tion is handled specially: it is parsed by the runner as an internal reasoning action rather than submit-ted to the environment, so it is not counted as an environment step. 

A.2 Baseline Details 

ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) is a standard interactive baseline that alternates between a brief reasoning trace and a primitive environment action. Reflex-ion (Shinn et al., 2023) augments this loop with a self-reflection after failed attempts. Since Reflex-ion does not maintain cross-task memory in our setting, we allow it one retry within the same task episode and keep at most three within-task reflec-tions in context. ExpeL (Zhao et al., 2024) main-tains cross-task textual rules induced from prior trajectories; because this memory is reused across tasks, we evaluate ExpeL without an additional retry. ExpeL retrieves the two most similar prior experiences, keeps at most 20 learned rules, keeps the three most recent reflections in context, updates rules in batches of eight trajectories, critiques eight successful trajectories per update, and uses task-similarity retrieval with the all-mpnet-base-v2 

embedder. AWM (Wang et al., 2024) stores suc-cessful action workflows and retrieves one work-flow for later tasks, with one induction pass after each episode. ASI (Wang et al., 2025) induces symbolic task knowledge from experience. Wall-E (Zhou et al., 2024) and WorldCoder (Tang et al., 2024) are included as symbolic-learning or world-modeling baselines. Wall-E uses one candidate action, mines rules every 100 trajectories, and al-lows up to three internal retries during rule gen-eration. WorldCoder uses bandit planning with exploration rate 0.05, bandit constant 5.0, and at most three LLM planning steps. These hyperpa-rameters match the important defaults used by the corresponding open-source implementations when-ever applicable. For OCM, we allow up to three attempts when parsing reflection plans or repairing generated knowledge updates. The original WorldCoder formulation was not directly usable in our environments. These bench-marks are complex and partially observable, and the agent could not reliably learn effective tran-sition and reward functions from raw interaction alone during decision making. To obtain a runnable and competitive adaptation, we let the agent syn-thesize a transition function and a reward function from the trajectory at the end of each episode. In later episodes, these learned functions are included in the context and used as auxiliary world-model information for action selection. For fairness, all methods use the same back-bone model and are evaluated in the same online order. We do not include benchmark examples, task-specific shortcuts, or hand-written benchmark-specific heuristics in any prompt. Prompts contain only generic interaction instructions and the action-format information needed to communicate with each environment. 

A.3 Prompt Templates 

The following boxes reproduce the OCM prompt templates used in our implementation, with runtime values represented as placeholders. 

OCM Action Prompt 

System: You are an interactive environment agent with access to two learned Python resources. object_knowledge.py describes reusable environment object types, observable states, affordances, constraints, relations, and state changes. procedural_knowledge/ describes reusable interaction lessons: workflows, rules, failure patterns, insights, syntax constraints, decision heuristics, and recovery strategies that use those object types. These resources are for reading and reasoning, not for direct execution. Do not copy internal class, file, or function names as environment actions. Use signatures, procedural index entries, and any inspected code to choose the next real text action. Inspect relevant learned resources when you are uncertain about object affordances, action syntax, preconditions, success signals, failure causes, or recovery. Output exactly two lines: a brief Thought line and an Action line. Use internal inspect only to read learned resources, for example: Action: Inspect[object.Container, procedural. heating_substance]. Otherwise the Action line must be one primitive environment action. Benchmark instruction: {benchmark_instruction} System: object_knowledge.py signatures: {object_signatures or "(empty)"} procedural_knowledge/index.py: 

``` python {procedural_index or "PROCEDURAL_KNOWLEDGE = {}"} 

``` 

Inspected learned code available in this episode: 

``` python {expanded_source} 

``` 

Conversation history: {previous user/assistant trajectory messages} User: {current_observation} 

OCM Reflection Prompt 

System: Analyze one completed environment episode and write a concise update plan for two learned Python resources that will be read during future decisions. object_knowledge.py models reusable environment entities, states, affordances, constraints, relations, and state changes. procedural_knowledge/*.py stores compact action-facing lessons that use object_knowledge types: workflows, rules, syntax constraints, failure patterns, 

decision heuristics, or recovery principles. Design principles: Separate the world model from action lessons. Ground every update in observations, invalid-action feedback, reward, done, or success signals. Treat existing knowledge as provisional: preserve it when supported, refine it when incomplete, and replace it when contradicted. Successful episodes show what works; failed episodes mostly show preconditions, invalid syntax, missing observations, failure causes, and recovery. Keep final knowledge compact and reusable. Return JSON only. Do not return Markdown. User JSON: {"benchmark": "{benchmark_name}", "result": {result_meta}, "object_knowledge_signatures": "{object_signatures}", "procedural_knowledge_index_py": "{procedural_index}", "episode_steps": {steps}, "rules": { "output": [ "Return JSON only with keys: object_knowledge_updates, procedural_knowledge_updates, inspect_objects, inspect_procedural.", "Each planned update should be compact: target, operation, lesson, evidence, reason.", "operation is create, update, or replace.", "inspect_objects contains object top-level names or ClassName.method_name names to inspect.", "inspect_procedural contains procedural file stems without .py to inspect." ], "selection": [ "Plan only reusable knowledge supported by the episode.", "Use object updates for entities, states, affordances, constraints, relations, or mappings.", "Use procedural updates for workflows, rules, syntax constraints, failure patterns, heuristics, or recovery.", "Skip one-offs, exact locations, task ids, raw trajectories, and full action scripts." ], "content": [ "Evidence should mention the relevant observation, invalid feedback, reward, done, or success signal.", "If existing knowledge is contradicted, plan replace rather than only adding new knowledge.", "For procedural updates, name the object_knowledge types or helpers the lesson should use." ]}}

OCM Knowledge-Update Prompt 

System: Implement updates from a completed environment episode for two learned Python resources that future decisions will read. object_knowledge.py models reusable environment entities, states, affordances, constraints, relations, and state changes. procedural_knowledge/*.py stores compact action-facing lessons that use object_knowledge types: workflows, rules, syntax constraints, failure patterns, decision heuristics, or recovery principles. Design principles: Separate the world model from action lessons. Ground every update in observations, invalid-action feedback, reward, done, or success signals. Treat existing knowledge as provisional: preserve it when supported, refine it when incomplete, and replace it when contradicted. Successful episodes show what works; failed episodes mostly show preconditions, invalid syntax, missing observations, failure causes, and recovery. Keep final knowledge compact and reusable. Return JSON only with keys 'object_knowledge ' and '   

> procedural_knowledge '. Each key maps to a list of objects with fields 'existing_name ','name ', and '
> code '. For new knowledge, existing_name is empty. For replacement or rename, existing_name is the current object class name or procedural file stem. name is the resulting class name or file stem. code is the complete replacement code for that item. User JSON: {"object_knowledge_signatures": "{object_signatures}", "procedural_knowledge_index_py": "{procedural_index}", "update_plan": {update_plan}, "inspected_source": "{inspected_source}", "result": {result_meta}, "episode_steps": {steps}, "previous_error": "{previous_error}", "rules": { "object_knowledge": [ "Write compact classes or top-level helpers for reusable environment entities, states, affordances, constraints, relations, and mappings.", "Model only what the episode evidence supports.", "Use simple defaults so deterministic checks can instantiate classes without live environment access .", "Never import object_knowledge from inside object_knowledge.py.", "Do not write task solutions, action scripts, or episode transcripts." ], "procedural_knowledge": [ "Each file represents one compact reusable interaction lesson.", "Import object_knowledge classes or helpers instead of redefining environment entities.", "Use short docstrings, small constants, typed records, and focused helpers.", "Action strings are allowed only as primitive syntax examples, not complete scripts or next-action APIs .", "Helpers should classify, explain, check applicability, or expose examples; they should not choose the next action.", "When replacing an existing file, remove claims contradicted by the episode." ], "quality": [ "Use retrieval-friendly names and brief docstrings .", "Keep detailed evidence in the reflection plan, not in long code comments or docstrings.", "Every procedural file must include a lightweight no -argument __verify__() with deterministic assertions .", "__verify__ should check imports/references and simple helper behavior.", "__verify__ must not call the live environment or external services.", "The candidate knowledge must compile and import successfully." ]}}

A.4 Additional Case Study: Reusing Learned Procedural Knowledge 

We present an additional ScienceWorld case that il-lustrates how OCM reuses knowledge accumulated from earlier episodes. Before episode 2-3_225 , the agent had interacted with several related melting-point tasks. Those earlier trajectories did not all end in success, but they provided reusable evidence about the task structure: the agent must focus on a thermometer, access the target substance even when it is nested in a container, measure or induce its temperature, compare the result against a thresh-old, and then focus on the correct destination box. From these experiences, OCM wrote a procedu-ral entry for measuring and sorting a substance by melting point; we refer to this entry as M ELT SORT 

below. Figures 6 and 7 show the object interface and procedural excerpt used by this case. The later task 2-3_225 asks the agent to measure the melting point of solid unknown substance Y and focus on the blue box if the measured tem-perature is above 200.0 degrees Celsius, other-wise on the orange box. This task is difficult for baselines: ReAct, Reflexion, ExpeL, AWM, ASI, WorldCoder, and Wall-E all fail on the same instance, while OCM succeeds with reward 100. During decision making, OCM calls the learned melting-point procedure and inspects its source. The procedure itself is not an environment action, so the agent then converts the inspected proce-dure into valid ScienceWorld actions: it focuses on the thermometer and substance, picks up the thermometer, uses it on the substance, opens the oven, moves the substance into the oven, activates the oven, waits, measures again, observes a tem-perature of 390 degrees Celsius, and focuses on the blue box. The case shows that the learned pro-cedure is useful not as a script to copy verbatim, but as an executable and inspectable model of the hidden task logic. In 2-3_225 , the procedure arguments bind to the thermometer, solid unknown substance Y , the blue box, the orange box, and threshold 200.0 . The inspected code therefore gives the agent the correct decision skeleton, while the online trajectory sup-plies the concrete environment actions needed to realize it. Stage Evidence OCM knowledge Effect on 2-3_225 

Prior episodes Related melting-point tasks expose repeated partial progress and failures on thermometer use, nested substance access, temper-ature/state reading, and threshold-based box selec-tion. OCM creates M ELT SORT , a reusable procedure with ac-cessibility checks, tempera-ture/state retrieval, threshold comparison, and conditional focus (Figures 6–7). The relevant procedure is already available be-fore the later unknown-substance task begins. Target episode The task asks whether solid unknown substance Y has melting point above 200.0 

degrees Celsius. All seven baselines fail on the same in-stance. During action selection, OCM calls and inspects MELT SORT , exposing the decision skeleton in Figure 7 rather than a fixed action script. The agent decomposes the inspected source into le-gal actions, heats and re-measures the substance, ob-serves 390 degrees Celsius, and focuses on the blue box. 

Table 4: Evidence that OCM reuses previously learned procedural knowledge on a later ScienceWorld task where all baselines fail. Object Knowledge Interface Used by the Procedure 

class ObjectKnowledge: def __init__(self, name, location=None): self.name = name self.location = location self.contains = [] self.properties = {} def get_state(self): return self.properties.get("state") def get_temperature(self): return self.properties.get("temperature") def is_living_thing(self): return False def is_in_inventory(self): return self.location is None def focus(self): if self.is_container(): living = self.get_living_things() if living: return living[0] substances = [ obj for obj in self.contains if not obj.is_living_thing() and not obj.is_container() ]if len(substances) == 1: return substances[0] return self class Container(ObjectKnowledge): def is_accessible(self): return self.properties.get("is_open", True) def can_be_opened(self): return self.properties.get("openable", False) def can_accept(self, obj): if not self.is_accessible(): return False capacity = self.properties.get("capacity") if capacity is not None and len(self.contains) >= capacity: return False return True def open_container(self): if self.can_be_opened(): self.properties["is_open"] = True return self.is_accessible() 

Figure 6: Excerpt of the object knowledge used by the melting-point procedure. The full object_knowledge.py 

contains additional unrelated methods; here we retain the state, temperature, focus, inventory, and container-accessibility interfaces needed for this case. Learned Procedural Knowledge 

from typing import Optional from object_knowledge import ObjectKnowledge, Container def is_container_accessible(container: Container) -> bool: if container.is_accessible(): return True if container.can_be_opened(): container.open_container() return container.is_accessible() return False def get_substance_temperature_or_state( substance: ObjectKnowledge ) -> Optional[float]: if substance.is_living_thing(): return None state = substance.get_state() if state is not None and state.lower() == "air": return None temperature = substance.get_temperature() if temperature is not None: return temperature if state is not None: if "molten" in state.lower() or "liquid" in state.lower(): return 250.0 elif "solid" in state.lower() or "frozen" in state.lower(): return 10.0 return None def focus_on_object(obj: ObjectKnowledge) -> bool: state = obj.get_state() if state is not None and state.lower() == "air": return False if obj.is_in_inventory(): return True focused = obj.focus() return focused is not None def use_thermometer_on_substance( thermometer: ObjectKnowledge, substance: ObjectKnowledge, ) -> Optional[float]: temp = thermometer.get_temperature() if temp is not None: return temp return get_substance_temperature_or_state(substance) def measure_and_sort_substance_by_melting_point_with_nested_container_handling( thermometer: ObjectKnowledge, substance: ObjectKnowledge, container_if_above_threshold: Container, container_if_below_threshold: Container, melting_point_threshold: float = 10.0, ) -> bool: if not focus_on_object(thermometer): return False if not focus_on_object(substance): return False temperature = use_thermometer_on_substance(thermometer, substance) if temperature is None: return False if temperature > melting_point_threshold: target_container = container_if_above_threshold else: target_container = container_if_below_threshold if not is_container_accessible(target_container): return False if not focus_on_object(target_container): return False return True 

Figure 7: Excerpt of the learned procedural code used by OCM for measuring and sorting a substance by melting point. The full procedure contains longer docstrings and additional comments; this excerpt preserves the executable control flow and calls into the object interface in Figure 6.