Title: MASS: Multiplayer World Models with Authoritative Shared State

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06257v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 01:14:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# MASS: Multiplayer World Models with Authoritative Shared State 

Ziqi Cai 1,2,3,§ , Siqi Yang 1,2,§ , Yimu Wang 2, Zixian Gao 1,§ , Yunheng Liu 2,

Shuchen Weng 2, Erwin Wu 3, Kaipeng Zhang 1,‡ , Boxin Shi 2,† 

> 1

Alaya Lab 2Peking University 3Institute of Science Tokyo 

Current video world models struggle in multiplayer environments because they entangle world state with view-dependent visual latents, leading to redundant compute, view inconsistencies, and poor scalability. We propose MASS ( Multiplayer world models with Authoritative Shared State) to resolve this limitation. Inspired by multiplayer game architectures, MASS disentangles world dynamics and view rendering. A learned Logic Engine advances a global, authoritative typed state from joint actions without any hand-written transition function, acting as the sole recurrent memory and synchronization reference. From this shared state, a learned Rendering Engine generates independent and consistent views for any requested camera on demand. This explicit disentangling allows MASS to achieve superior state accuracy and lower cross-view inconsistency compared to state-of-the-art multi-view baselines on a matched multiplayer Snake benchmark. It advances predicted worlds with 1,024 concurrent players for 10,000 recurrent steps. Our results show that explicit, authoritative state modeling provides a practical foundation for scalable and consistent multi-agent world simulation. 

Project Page: https://alaya-lab.github.io/MASS/ 

Date: August 7, 2026 

Figure 1 A predicted Snake world with 1,024 players. The center visualizes the authoritative typed state. Four screens show learned renders for selected client cameras and the gamepads show their current actions. 

> §

This work was done during their internships at Alaya Lab. 

> †

Corresponding author. shiboxin@pku.edu.cn .

> ‡

Project leader. kaipeng.zhang@shanda.com .

1arXiv:2608.06257v1 [cs.CV] 6 Aug 2026 1 Introduction 

Interactive video world models simulate video games by predicting the next observation from world history and the player’s action. GameNGen [ 27 ], Oasis [ 7], DIAMOND [ 1], Genie [ 4], and WHAM [ 14 ]produce responsive, visually detailed rollouts without running a traditional game engine. Their pixel or visual-latent interface combines one player’s view with the recurrent memory used for simulation, which suits a single-player setting. Multiplayer simulation needs a recurrent state that belongs to the world rather than to any camera. A thousand players can inhabit one world, yet each camera reveals only a small part of it. Separate recurrent visual histories encode the same shared content a thousand times, allow simultaneous views to disagree about the same entity, and tie the cost of simulating the world to the number of views being watched . Existing multiplayer world models coordinate views through joint generation or shared visual representations. Gamma-World [ 16 ], MultiWorld [ 28 ], MultiGen [ 22 ], and WanToFight [ 12 ] keep their shared representations visual, dense, or externally maintained. None use a typed authoritative state that serves as both recurrent memory and synchronization object. Online games already separate shared simulation from per-player presentation [ 3, 6]. An authoritative server advances one canonical game state. Clients receive versioned snapshots, predict locally through update gaps, and render their own cameras. The world is simulated once , independent of the number of clients that render it. MASS ( Multiplayer world models with Authoritative Shared State) brings this contract to learned world models. In MASS, a schema declares the typed entities of a game. At each tick, a learned Logic Engine advances the complete typed state from the joint player actions and declared exogenous inputs. Every game in this report instantiates the same decoder-only Transformer architecture with game-specific tokenizers, embeddings, and model weights. A learned Rendering Engine then synthesizes each requested observation from that predicted state and a client camera. The typed state carries the recurrent memory and is published as the client synchronization message. Every rendered view conditions on that same state. No hand-written transition function runs during rollout. Figure 1 shows one predicted Snake world state with four client views decoded from it. Our contributions can be summarized as: • We formulate learned multiplayer simulation as prediction of an authoritative typed state followed by camera-conditioned rendering. The same predicted state is the recurrent history, the synchronization reference, and the source of every client view. • We develop a schema-based architecture where the Logic Engine advances typed entity records and the Rendering Engine generates requested observations. Rollout uses no native game transition, and the Logic Engine can temporarily predict from a synchronized client state during update gaps. • We evaluate this formulation with matched multiplayer baselines, cross-game studies, simulated update stalls, and long recurrent rollouts. MASS reaches 0.76 state recovery on matched Snake compared with 0.128 for the strongest video-based baseline, and it advances 1,024 simulated player entities for 10,000 recurrent ticks. 

# 2 Related work  

> Video world models.

GameNGen [ 27 ], Oasis [ 7], DIAMOND [ 1], Genie [ 4], and WHAM [ 14 ] learn interactive environments by recurrently predicting action-conditioned observations, using pixels or visual latents as the recurrent carrier [ 2, 5 , 15 , 17 , 21 , 29 ]. Each new frame is decoded from a recurrent state that also serves as the input for the next step, which makes the simulation responsive in single-player settings. In multiplayer settings, however, every requested view would need its own independent recurrent history, and those histories can drift apart for the same world. MASS avoids this by predicting one shared typed state first, then decoding any number of views from that single prediction. 2Multiplayer generation. Gamma-World [ 16 ], MultiWorld [ 28 ], MultiGen [ 22 ], Agora-1 [ 20 ], and WanToFight [ 12 ]introduce global visual representations (MultiWorld), sparse hub attention with linear cross-agent cost (Gamma-World), or persistent external memories independent of the context window (MultiGen). MASS differs by making the recurrent world state explicitly typed, schema-constrained, directly evaluable before rendering, and suitable as a versioned synchronization object. The simulation cost stays independent of the number of rendered cameras because every view decodes from the same predicted state.  

> Structured dynamics.

Ha and Schmidhuber [ 8] showed that world models can be learned in compact latent spaces without predicting every pixel directly. Recurrent state-space predictors [ 9– 11 ], neural cellular automata [ 19 ], and convolutional recurrent models [ 26 ] further demonstrated that dynamics can be learned in state spaces beyond raw pixels [ 18 , 23 – 25 ]. These approaches use dense or latent representations that lack explicit entity structure, making it difficult to measure whether the predicted state is semantically valid before rendering it. With the typed records in MASS, entity persistence, position accuracy, and structural validity can be measured directly on the predicted state without generating a single frame.  

> Multiplayer execution.

Networked games separate an authoritative world update from state replication and client presentation [ 3 , 6 ]. The server advances one canonical game state, while each client renders its own view from versioned snapshots. MASS brings this same separation to learned world models. The learned transition runs once per tick, and the rendering stage serves any number of cameras from that single predicted state. This decoupling keeps the simulation workload independent of the spectator count, matching the efficiency model of traditional game servers. 

# 3 Method 

MASS uses the predicted typed state of the video game world as its single recurrent object. First, a World State Tokenizer maps the state to records declared by a game schema (Section 3.1). Then, the Logic Engine advances the records from the current state, the joint player actions, and declared exogenous inputs (Section 3.2). Next, the Rendering Engine converts camera-local projections of the predicted state into frames (Section 3.3). During rollout, both the transitions and the observations are produced by neural networks. The predicted state is versioned and distributed to clients. During an update stall ( e.g ., a network interruption), the same Logic Engine can temporarily advance a client’s latest version locally to maintain responsiveness (Section 3.4). We show an overview in Figure 2. 

3.1 World State Tokenizer 

Most world models carry recurrent information in a video latent, which mixes world dynamics with appearance. MASS instead uses an explicit typed state as the recurrent variable. Named fields make entities and their relations directly inspectable. A canonical serialization also provides a concrete, image-free synchronization message. Each new game supplies a schema and trajectories. The core architecture stays the same, but each game trains its own tokenizer, embeddings, and model weights. Our implementation uses bounded, schema-defined layouts so that record sequences can be batched efficiently and decoded with position-specific field masks. Canonical padding and type-tag ranges map every valid state to a fixed-width sequence, so the model can process any state admitted by the same schema without per-game architecture changes. The schema of a game is a short list of declarations, one per kind of entity, 

Σg = (kind j, fields j, count j) Jg

> j=1

. (1) Each entry names one kind of entity, the fields that describe it with the values each field may take, and the number of instances the world holds. The schema defines representation and validity, while the learned model supplies the transition. At every tick, the world state contains one record for each entity declared by the schema. Each record holds the current values of that entity’s fields, 

st =  ρ1 

> t

, . . . , ρKg

> t

, Kg = ∑j count j. (2) 3Client Client Server 

Logic Engine                  

> Player 1
> ↑←→↓···
> Player 2
> ↑AB↓· · ·
> Player 3
> ↑↑↑A· · ·
> Player 1024
> ↑↓←→···

⋮

Shared World State 

Predict Next State 

⋮

Rendering Engine 

Rendering Engine 

Rendering Engine 

Rendering Engine  

> Player 1
> Player 2
> Player 3
> Player 1024

Game Schema 

Players’ Next Actions Figure 2 Overview of MASS. Clients send player actions to the server each tick. The game schema defines the typed state, and the learned Logic Engine advances it from the joint actions to produce the next world state. The updated state is distributed to clients, where each Rendering Engine generates a player view from that shared state and the corresponding camera. Players then send their next actions, and the loop repeats. The world transition runs once per tick, while views are rendered on demand. 

We write Sg for the set of states the schema allows and AΣg for the assembly step that reads a full set of records back into one state. The World State Tokenizer turns each record into one short token sequence, 

uit = TΣg



ρit, cit, aπ(i) 

> t

, eit



, (3) where cit is a small window of nearby cells built from the current state and joint actions, aπ(i) 

> t

is the action of the player attached to the entity when one exists, and eit is the share of recorded randomness that belongs to this record. Numbers, coordinates, flags, optional values, and lists are written with type tags at fixed positions, so every record decodes back into its fields without loss. In Snake, for example, the schema has three entries. The global entry holds the tick counter. Each snake entry records the body segments, heading, and life status of one of the 1,024 snakes. Each of the 4,096 food entries lists the food cells inside one 8 × 8 region. One tick therefore instantiates Kg = 5,121 records. 

3.2 Logic Engine 

The Logic Engine is the only learned component that advances the shared state. It applies one decoder-only Transformer to the tokenized records. The model interface is shared across all record types, and each game trains its own tokenizer, embeddings, and model weights with the same core architecture. Let ˆst ∈ S g be the predicted world state at tick t, at the joint action of all players, and et the exogenous input. The world-level transition is ˆst+1 = Fθ (ˆst, at, et). (4) The tokenizer and assembler realize it through record-wise prediction. If yi,jt+1 is token j of the next state of record i, the learned distribution factorizes as 

pθ (st+1 | st, at, et) ≈

> Kg

# ∏

> i=1

# ∏

> j

pθ



yi,jt+1 | uit, yi,<jt+1



, (5) 4where each record conditions on its own prefix and its previously decoded tokens. Self-attention stays confined to each record’s sequence. Interactions between world objects enter through the neighborhood window cit, computed from the shared state before prediction. Records are batched freely at training and inference with no attention between them. This factorization supports the 1,024-entity worlds in our experiments. A schema-derived mask restricts every output position to the values its field allows, and a deterministic selector enforces cross-record constraints (sortedness, uniqueness) during decoding. The assembler produces ˆst+1 = AΣg



{ ˆρ1

> t+1

, . . . , ˆ ρKg

> t+1

}



, (6) which becomes the next recurrent input and the single state read by every downstream view. 

3.3 Rendering Engine 

Rendering begins from a world whose structure is already explicit. For camera i, a projection Pi writes what occupies each visible cell, which entity it belongs to, which player owns the camera, and the view geometry into a camera-local tensor. A learned residual U-Net turns this projection into an RGB frame, ˆoit = Rϕ(Pi(ˆst), κi). (7) For the requested camera set Ct, the observation model factorizes as 

pϕ( ˆoCt 

> t

| ˆst, κCt ) = ∏

> i∈C t

pϕ( ˆoit | Pi(ˆst), κi). (8) Every view reads the same shared state, so the decoder controls appearance without reconciling separate visual histories. The renderer reads the projected typed state and camera rather than an RGB history. Cameras can be added, moved, or upgraded at rollout time without changing the world transition. Resolution, materials, and lighting can likewise change without retraining the learned dynamics. The renderers in this report share the typed interface across different visual themes. This separation of world dynamics from view synthesis can be evaluated independently through the State-Referenced Semantic Correctness (SRSC) protocol described in §4. 

3.4 Server and client logic 

Authoritative denotes the sole state version adopted by all clients, regardless of prediction accuracy. After each global transition the server publishes a versioned typed snapshot. Clients that apply the same version render from the same predicted world. With N active entities, C state recipients, and snapshot size S, the evaluated per-tick server workload is 

Tserver = Tlogic (N) + C t sync (S). (9) The learned transition runs once . Distribution is linear in C, while rendering runs locally on each client from the received typed state. The versioned state also initializes temporary client-side prediction during a stall. The client advances the latest authoritative state with the same Logic Engine, supplies its own actions, and leaves other players’ actions and unknown spawns empty until the next server version arrives. 5Table 1 Architectural comparison of multiplayer world models. B-PV: per-view video predictor; B-SL: shared-latent predictor; B-UN: dense joint-state predictor. Method Recurrent carrier Explicit shared state Logic and rendering Synchronization object View execution B-PV RGB for each view N/A N/A N/A Per view B-SL Visual latent N/A N/A N/A Joint latent MultiWorld [28] Coupled multiview N/A N/A N/A Joint views B-UN Dense state grid ✓ Separate Dense grid On demand MASS Typed state ✓ Separate Full state On demand  

> Table 2

Matched multiplayer Snake results. Best in bold and second best underlined. Metric MASS MultiWorld B-PV B-SL B-UN LPIPS ↓ 0.098 0.277 0.397 0.396 0.123 Parser ↑ 0.764 0.067 0.128 0.083 0.000 Count ↑ 0.234 0.006 0.141 0.109 0.051 Pos. ↑ 0.355 0.250 0.286 0.180 0.002 Event F1 ↑ 0.552 0.065 0.542 0.528 0.007 X-view ↓ 0.000 0.984 1.000 1.000 0.051 Invalid ↓ 0.177 0.981 0.052 0.052 1.000 

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Setup 

The matched benchmark, using identical held-out episodes and synchronized cameras, evaluates every method from the same initial world at 128 × 128 resolution over 128 ticks. Training episodes, joint actions, camera paths, and optimization budgets remain fixed, so the comparison tests how each recurrent carrier preserves shared game information. The appendix reports the full protocols. 

4.2 Training details 

The matched Logic Engine uses AdamW with learning rate 2 × 10 −4, weight decay 10 −4, batch size 8, gradient clipping at 1.0, bfloat16 arithmetic, and 20,000 one-step teacher-forced updates. Autoregressive evaluation decodes greedily and feeds back every predicted token without native transition calls, state replacement, or gameplay-rule repair. 

4.3 Baselines 

The matched benchmark compares recurrent carriers under identical data and budgets. MultiWorld [ 28 ] is a publicly released multiplayer world model that jointly generates coordinated views, and we retrain its official code on the benchmark data. B-PV advances each client view with an independent video predictor. B-SL advances one shared visual latent from which every view is decoded. B-UN keeps the rest of the MASS pipeline and replaces the typed carrier with a dense joint state predictor. The baseline designs are summarized in Table 1. All baselines receive an equivalent representation of the same reconstructed spawn information. 

4.4 Metrics 

We score the matched rollouts by perceptual quality, state recovery, agreement between simultaneous views, and structural validity. LPIPS measures perceptual quality [ 30 ]. A frozen parser measures overall state recovery, entity counts, positions, and event F1 from each rendered frame. X-view records disagreement between simultaneous views. Invalid is the fraction of recovered states that break the game structure or its consistency. Logic-only studies compare the predicted typed state directly with the engine state using field accuracy, full-state exact match, and structural validity. State-Referenced Semantic Correctness, or SRSC, provides 6Figure 3 State-conditioned renders across eight games. Columns show Snake, Crate Pusher, Pac-Man, Tank Battle, Lunar Touchdown, Frogger, Tron, and Bomberman. Rows show different timesteps.   

> Table 3 Held-out reconstruction quality at 256

× 256 resolution. Object PSNR is measured on entity pixels. Game PSNR (dB) ↑ Object PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑                        

> Snake 38.82 29.44 0.996 Crate Pusher 28.50 29.64 0.987 Pac-Man 33.95 30.50 0.987 Tank Battle 32.21 29.93 0.988 Lunar Touchdown 39.83 31.49 0.995 Frogger 40.24 37.26 0.995 Bomberman 27.82 27.58 0.969 Tron 23.72 23.20 0.910

complementary vision and language scores for logic, rendering, and the complete prediction [ 13 , 31 ]. The appendix gives the complete protocols. 

4.5 Main results 

The matched Snake results are shown in Table 2. MASS leads six of the seven metrics. Its LPIPS of 0.098 is the lowest perceptual error among all methods, compared with 0.123 for the next best (B-UN) and 0.277 for MultiWorld. Parser recovery reaches 0.764, more than five times the highest video-based baseline (B-PV at 0.128). State-level consistency is guaranteed by construction because every rendered view decodes from the same predicted typed state. In the matched benchmark this yields a measured X-view disagreement of 0.000, confirming that the learned Rendering Engine does not introduce cross-view inconsistencies. B-UN achieves competitive LPIPS yet its parser recovery falls to zero, confirming that pixel-level agreement does not guarantee a recoverable world state. MASS preserves entity counts, positions, and interaction outcomes while every requested camera inherits one consistent prediction. Learned renders across eight games are shown in Figure 3, and Table 3 reports their held-out reconstruction quality. The same Logic Engine and Rendering Engine architecture, instantiated per game with game-specific weights, runs on every game through its declarative schema. PSNR ranges from 23.72 dB for Tron to 40.24 dB for Frogger, with five of the eight games exceeding 32 dB. Object PSNR, which measures pixel accuracy on entity regions, stays above 27.5 dB across most games. These results indicate the typed-state interface supports diverse visual themes without per-game architecture changes beyond tokenizers, embeddings, and model weights. The same transition architecture also advances worlds with 1,024 simulated player entities for 10,000 recurrent ticks. Because the learned transition runs once per tick, the cost of advancing the world is 7MultiWorld B-SL  B-PV Ours GT  B-UN Figure 4 Frames from a held-out matched Snake rollout. Rows compare MultiWorld, B-PV, B-SL, B-UN, MASS, and the ground truth. 

independent of the number of rendered views. State distribution and requested rendering remain separate workloads. The appendix reports per-horizon results and measured throughput. 

4.6 Qualitative results 

The held-out rollout in Figure 4 matches the quantitative comparison. MultiWorld develops smeared or misplaced entities, while B-PV and B-SL retain little beyond the selected player. MASS keeps the food field, snake geometry, and interaction outcomes aligned with the reference through the 128-tick rollout. 

4.7 Ablations 

We test the typed carrier and the separation between dynamics and rendering. 8Table 4 Client prediction during missing server updates on Snake.                 

> k=1k=2k=4k=8In-view agreement, oracle joint inputs 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 In-view agreement, local actions only 0.815 0.652 0.604 0.429 Local-avatar displacement (cells) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
> Typed carrier.

Replacing the typed carrier with the dense joint predictor reduces parser recovery to zero and nearly eliminates recoverable interaction events (B-UN ablation), even though LPIPS remains competitive at 0.123. The dense grid does not preserve entity identity across ticks because the same grid cell must encode a different entity at each step, and the U-Net lacks an explicit mechanism for tracking which object is which between frames. The typed carrier connects visual agreement to a recoverable world state by keeping each entity record separate. Further logic-only comparisons appear in the appendix.  

> Error localization.

The explicit state interface lets us measure dynamics and rendering separately. The SRSC logic score tracks state degradation, while renderer fidelity remains stable when the predicted state is replaced by the reference state. This separation locates an error in world evolution or appearance synthesis. The complete component analysis appears in the appendix. 

4.8 Client prediction 

When server updates stall, a client advances the latest authoritative state with the same Logic Engine. It supplies its own actions and uses no-op actions for the other players. Table 4 reports in-view agreement, defined as the multiset intersection-over-union of visible (kind, x, y) objects in the predicted and server states, after one, two, four, and eight missing server updates. The local avatar remains correct for every evaluated stall length, so the next server update requires no position correction for that player. Agreement for other visible objects decreases as their unknown actions accumulate. With oracle joint inputs, the client rollout matches the server for all eight ticks, which attributes the difference to missing remote actions rather than the learned transition. 

# 5 Conclusion 

MASS brings the authoritative-server architecture of multiplayer games to learned world models. A shared predicted state keeps simultaneous cameras consistent by construction and separates world-transition cost from the number of rendered views. In our experiments, the same compact Logic Engine and Rendering Engine support several games through declarative schemas, long structurally valid rollouts, client-side prediction without local-player displacement, and worlds with 1,024 simulated player entities. The typed-state interface locates errors in dynamics or rendering before a frame is ever generated, and the schema mechanism lets new games use the same architecture without modification. These results demonstrate that disentangling world dynamics from view synthesis provides a practical foundation for large learned multiplayer worlds. Extending the same principle to 3D environments and richer entity interactions is a natural direction for future work. 

# Acknowledgments 

This study was carried out using the TSUBAME4.0 supercomputer at Institute of Science Tokyo. 9References 

[1] Eloi Alonso, Adam Jelley, Vincent Micheli, Anssi Kanervisto, Amos Storkey, Tim Pearce, and François Fleuret. Diffusion for world modeling: Visual details matter in Atari. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [2] Chris Bamford and Simon M. Lucas. Neural game engine: Accurate learning of generalizable forward models from pixels. In IEEE Conference on Games , 2020. [3] Yahn W. Bernier. Latency compensating methods in client/server in-game protocol design and optimization. Game Developers Conference, 2001. [4] Jake Bruce, Michael Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, et al. Genie: Generative interactive environ-ments. International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [5] Silvia Chiappa, Sébastien Racanière, Daan Wierstra, and Shakir Mohamed. Recurrent environment simulators. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. [6] Mark Claypool and Kajal Claypool. Latency and player actions in online games. Communications of the ACM , 49(11):40–45, 2006. [7] Decart, Julian Quevedo, Quinn McIntyre, Spruce Campbell, Xinlei Chen, and Robert Wachen. Oasis: A universe in a transformer. Project page, 2024. Project credit: Decart and Etched. [8] David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2018. [9] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019. [10] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [11] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 , 2023. [12] Li Hu, Guangyuan Wang, Peng Zhang, and Bang Zhang. WanToFight: Real-time generative game engine for multi-player combat interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.12592 , 2026. [13] Yushi Hu, Benlin Liu, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Mari Ostendorf, Ranjay Krishna, and Noah A. Smith. TIFA: Accurate and interpretable text-to-image faithfulness evaluation with question answering. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023. [14] Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Linda Yilin Wen, Martin Grayson, Raluca Georgescu, Sergio Valcar-cel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Tabish Rashid, Tim Pearce, Yuhan Cao, Abdelhak Lemkhenter, Chentian Jiang, Gavin Costello, Gunshi Gupta, Marko Tot, Shu Ishida, Tarun Gupta, Udit Arora, Ryen W. White, Sam Devlin, Cecily Morrison, and Katja Hofmann. World and human action models towards gameplay ideation. Nature , 638(8051):656–663, 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-08600-3. [15] Seung Wook Kim, Yuhao Zhou, Jonah Philion, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Learning to simulate dynamic environments with GameGAN. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020. [16] Fangfu Liu, Kai He, Tianchang Shen, Tianshi Cao, Sanja Fidler, Yueqi Duan, Jun Gao, Igor Gilitschenski, Zian Wang, and Xuanchi Ren. Gamma-World: Generative multi-agent world modeling beyond two players. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.28816 , 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2605.28816. [17] Willi Menapace, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Aliaksandr Siarohin, and Elisa Ricci. Playable video generation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2021. [18] Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, and François Fleuret. Transformers are sample-efficient world models. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 10 [19] Alexander Mordvintsev, Ettore Randazzo, Eyvind Niklasson, and Michael Levin. Growing neural cellular automata. Distill , 2020. [20] Odyssey. Introducing agora-1: The multi-agent world model. Technical report, 2026. [21] Junhyuk Oh, Xiaoxiao Guo, Honglak Lee, Richard L. Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Action-conditional video prediction using deep networks in Atari games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2015. [22] Ryan Po, David Junhao Zhang, Amir Hertz, Gordon Wetzstein, Neal Wadhwa, and Nataniel Ruiz. MultiGen: Level-design for editable multiplayer worlds in diffusion game engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06679 , 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.06679. [23] Jan Robine, Marc Höftmann, Tobias Uelwer, and Stefan Harmeling. Transformer-based world models are happy with 100k interactions. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [24] Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter W. Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. [25] Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, and David Silver. Mastering Atari, Go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature , 588:604–609, 2020. [26] Xingjian Shi, Zhourong Chen, Hao Wang, Dit-Yan Yeung, Wai-Kin Wong, and Wang-chun Woo. Convolutional LSTM network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2015. [27] Dani Valevski, Yaniv Leviathan, Moab Arar, and Shlomi Fruchter. Diffusion models are real-time game engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14837 , 2024. [28] Haoyu Wu, Jiwen Yu, Yingtian Zou, and Xihui Liu. MultiWorld: Scalable multi-agent multi-view video world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.18564 , 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.18564. [29] Sherry Yang, Yilun Du, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Leslie Kaelbling, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [30] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018. [31] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2023. 11 Appendix 

# A MASS in detail 

A.1 A real game schema 

All game-specific configuration in MASS enters through one declarative file. The listing below is a lightly abridged version of the schema used for the population-scale Snake results (rollouts with N=1024 and 1,024-view walls). The matched benchmark uses a separate compact codec described in Appendix B.1. It declares the typed tables of the world (1,024 snakes and 4,096 spatially bucketed food rows), the spatial anchor of each record, and the neighborhood layers written into the context window cit (Eq. 3). The Logic Engine receives no transition rules, rewards, or game code. A new game supplies a schema of this form and recorded trajectories. The same format supported the integration of three games in one night. 

schema_version: snake-n1024-factorized-v4 game: snake engine_state_schema: snake-1 representation_boundary: serde_serialization_only generated_from: state_type: engine_snake::state::SnakeWorldState state_source: game-engine/crates/engine-snake/src/state.rs agreement: state_json_to_typed_rows_roundtrip_exact factorization: constants: arena: [512, 512] viewport_cells: 31 globals: row_kind: global fields: [tick] tables: - state_field: snakes # one row per player entity row_kind: snake rows: 1024 matching: index action: joint_index # receives that player’s action token anchor: body.0 # records are spatially anchored at the head - state_field: food # world-owned entities, spatially bucketed row_kind: food_bucket rows: 4096 matching: index canonical: sorted_unique # decoded as a canonical sorted set anchor: $index layout: type: spatial_buckets width: 512 height: 512 bucket_width: 8 bucket_height: 8 spatial_context: # what each record sees around its anchor arena_field: arena radius: 4 layers: - {source_field: food, points: $item, value: {fixed: food}} - {source_field: snakes, points: body, value: {fixed: body}} - source_field: snakes points: body.0 indexed_action: true # neighbors’ pending actions are visible value: template: head_{heading_x}_{heading_y}_a{action} # ... field vocabularies, bounded body bucketing, and canonical-order # declarations follow (157 lines total in the repository). 

12 A.2 Additional details of MASS 

MASS uses the shared world state as its recurrent object. The Logic Engine advances this state once, and the Rendering Engine answers camera queries from the result. Algorithm 1 describes the complete learned update. Here, MΣg denotes the field masks derived from the schema and Pc denotes the deterministic projection local to camera c.

Algorithm 1 One learned shared-world update.  

> Require:

Schema Σg, recurrent state ˆ st, version vt 

> Require:

Joint action at, declared input et, cameras Ct+1 

> Ensure:

State ˆ st+1, version vt+1, views { ˆIct+1}c∈C t+1 

> 1:

Rt ← Records Σg (ˆst)  

> 2: for all

ρit ∈ R t do  

> 3:

cit ← Context Σg (ρit, Rt) 

> 4:

uit ← TΣg (ρit, cit, aπ(i) 

> t

, eit) 

> 5:

ˆyit+1 ← Decode θ (uit, MΣg )  

> 6: end for
> 7:

ˆst+1 ← T−1 

> Σg

({ ˆyit+1}Kg

> i=1

) 

> 8:

vt+1 ← vt + 1  

> 9: for all

c ∈ C t+1 do  

> 10:

xct+1 ← Pc(ˆst+1) 

> 11:

ˆIct+1 ← Rϕ(xct+1)   

> 12: end for
> 13: return

ˆst+1, vt+1, { ˆIct+1}c∈C t+1

The record loop builds every prefix from the same current state and evaluates them as one batch. Assembly begins after all next records have been decoded. The camera loop then reads the assembled state without changing it. Each tick therefore contains one world transition, while rendering cost grows with the requested camera set. Every view uses the same predicted world with its own camera and player conditioning. 

Typed world state and game schemas. A schema specifies the entities that can occur in a game, the fields attached to each entity, and the legal domain of each field. At tick t, the resulting state is an ordered collection of typed records 

st =  ρ1 

> t

, . . . , ρKg

> t

, ρit = ( kind i, fields i), (10) where Kg is determined by the schema and scale of game g. The schema defines the representation. It identifies which values form a state, but it does not specify how a snake grows, how a crate moves, or how a collision is resolved. Those outcomes are learned from recorded transitions. Canonical serialization makes Eq. (10) unambiguous. Record kinds follow a fixed schema order, and records within an entity table are indexed by persistent slots or a declared canonical key. Booleans, categorical attributes, and integer coordinates use disjoint typed token ranges. Optional fields receive an explicit present or absent token. Bounded lists begin with their length and end in canonical padding. Spatial buckets and other variable-size collections are sorted and deduplicated before serialization. An unused entity slot is therefore an inactive typed record, not a missing position in the sequence. Decoding reverses these steps exactly and restores the full state consumed by the next rollout step. The matched Snake codec illustrates how a tick is flattened into tokens. The model input is a flat integer sequence assembled from four segments: the encoded state, player actions, exogenous inputs, and an output marker. Every field occupies a fixed position range, so the decoder mask (Eq. (12) ) constrains each output position to its declared vocabulary. Below is the prefix structure for a two-player episode at tick 142:   

> # Matched Snake input prefix (447 tokens). Each [value] is an integer token; # the ranges (NIBBLE, CELL, etc.) are defined by the schema. [0] # BOS [1] # STATE marker

13 # --- state segment (421 tokens) ---[5, 5, 13, 19] # tick = 142, as 4 hex nibbles (base 5..20) [CELL, CELL, ..., CELL] # 64 sorted food cell coordinates [11] # player_count = 2 # Player slot 0: body length 3, heading east, alive [BODY_LEN] # body_length = 3 [CELL, CELL, CELL] # body cells (23,45), (22,45), (21,45) [PAD] x37 # padding to MAX_BODY_LENGTH = 40 [HEADING] # heading = east [ALIVE] # alive = true [PAD] # dead_at = None (padding sentinel) # Player slot 1: body length 1, heading west, alive [BODY_LEN] # body_length = 1 [CELL] # body cell [PAD] x39 # padding [HEADING] # heading = west [ALIVE] # alive = true [PAD] # dead_at = None # Player slots 2-7: inactive (every field is a padding token) [PAD] x (44 x 6) # 44 padding tokens for each of six inactive player slots; 4+64+1+8x44=421 # --- action segment (8 tokens) ---[2] # ACTION marker [4, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] # player 0 = right, player 1 = up, rest no-op # --- exogenous inputs (13 tokens) ---[3] # EXOGENOUS marker [5, 5, 13, 19] # tick = 142 [7] # spawn_count = 2 [CELL, CELL] # spawn at (10,22) and (43,7) [PAD] x6 # padding to MAX_FOOD_SPAWNS = 8 [4] # OUTPUT marker (the model decodes the next state here) 

The decoder receives the entire prefix and predicts the next state tokens autoregressively after the OUTPUT 

marker. The schema-derived mask ensures that each field decodes to its declared type, for example the tick position can only produce nibble-range values, heading positions produce only the four cardinal directions plus a base token, and food coordinates are constrained to the arena and forced into sorted order by the dynamic selector. Body cells within one player are constrained to be unique within that body. These constraints make every decoded state structurally valid by construction. The model only needs to learn the transition dynamics, not the representation format. Table A.1 gives the layouts used in the main experiments. The compact matched Snake benchmark serializes one complete small state into a single sequence. The population-scale codecs factorize larger states into short record sequences and batch those records. Both use the same typed-state interface and train separate models. Across games, the experiment reuses the Transformer architecture and training recipe with game-specific weights. For record-wise prediction, local context is computed from the current state before any next-state field is decoded. Population-scale Snake and Crate Pusher use a schema-defined 9 × 9, radius-four grid centered on the record anchor. The selected Pac-Man codec instead supplies every row with a 3 × 3, radius-one anchor grid. Each 16 × 16 pellet-chunk row also receives up to 64 Pac-Man state and action records whose positions fall in that chunk enlarged by one cell on each boundary. Global, Pac-Man, and ghost rows do not receive this auxiliary list. These current-state contexts support local interactions without allowing a record to read another record’s unknown next-state label. Matched Snake differs by predicting the complete state from one full-state prefix rather than using a separate spatial patch. 14 Table A.1 Population-scale typed state layouts. The matched Snake benchmark uses a separate compact codec (see Appendix B.1). Regime Record kinds Representative fields Records/world Max. tokens/record Local context Matched Snake global, snake, food tick, body, heading, alive, food cells 1 867 complete-state prefix Snake, 

> N

=1024 global, snake, food bucket body, heading, death anchor, bucket entries 5,121 513 9 × 9 anchor grid Crate Pusher, 

> N

=1024 global, wall, goal, crate, pusher location, occupancy, goal, heading 2,583 124 9 × 9 anchor grid Pac-Man, 

> N

=1024 global, pellet chunk, pacman, ghost position, direction, life, pellets 2,049 2,590 3 × 3 grid, chunk-local agents ∗  

> ∗A pellet-chunk row also receives up to 64 Pac-Man state and action records from its 16 ×16 chunk and one-cell halo.

Exogenous inputs carry randomness that is supplied to the rollout rather than predicted as an interaction outcome. In the population-scale experiments they are engine-recorded tokens, such as prospective food spawns, and are replayed with the action stream during evaluation.  

> Logic Engine.

The Logic Engine is a decoder-only causal Transformer with width 256, six layers, eight attention heads, an MLP expansion ratio of four, tied token embeddings, learned sequence positions, and coordinate embeddings. The compact matched model has 5.66 million parameters and a configured maximum length of 1,024. Record-wise models use the same width, depth, and attention configuration. Their embedding tables and maximum length follow each schema, so parameter counts vary with the vocabulary. For prediction unit i, the codec forms a prefix 

uit = TΣg (ρit, cit, aπ(i) 

> t

, eit), (11) where cit is the current spatial context, aπ(i) 

> t

is the associated player action when the record has an owner, and eit is the relevant share of the exogenous input. Target tokens are appended autoregressively. Training minimizes token cross entropy under teacher forcing, 

Llogic = −

> Kg

# ∑

> i=1

# ∑

> j

log pθ

 yi,jt+1 | uit, yi,<jt+1

. (12) At inference, the model decodes every field greedily, assembles the predicted records into ˆst+1, and feeds that prediction into the next step. A schema-derived mask restricts each output position to its field vocabulary. Dynamic selectors enforce canonical list padding, sorted unique collections, and per-list uniqueness where these are part of the serialization contract. Movement, collision, growth, collection, death, and reward remain learned outcomes rather than selector rules. The direct state metrics in Appendix B.3 therefore measure semantic transition accuracy separately from structural decodability. Algorithm 1 also fixes the rollout ordering. Every prefix is built from one current predicted state. All next records are decoded before assembly, and assembly precedes publication and rendering. The same assembled prediction is the recurrent input, synchronization object, target for direct evaluation, and source for all requested images.  

> Rendering Engine.

Rendering starts with a camera-local projection Pi(ˆst). The projection rasterizes visible occupancy, semantic role, ownership and selected player identity, depth or range, and camera geometry into a 16-channel tensor. The camera is anchored to the selected entity and parameterized by heading, pitch, and a bounded field of view. Projection occurs independently for each requested camera, but every projection reads the same complete predicted state. 15 The native-resolution Rendering Engine is a geometry-aware residual U-Net. A 64-channel stem processes the 16 semantic channels together with coordinate, semantic-gradient, and depth-gradient features. Three downsampling stages, five dilated residual blocks at the bottleneck, and three skip-connected upsampling stages produce a sigmoid RGB output. The 2D and 2.5D scale studies use the same state and camera contract with a lighter shared U-Net whose width is selected per game. Resolutions are 128 × 128 in the matched benchmark, 96 × 96 in the six-renderer quantitative matrix, and 256 × 256 in the native-resolution comparison across games. Renderer training pairs a ground-truth typed state and recorded camera with an offline target image. The loss combines object-weighted Charbonnier reconstruction, multiscale L1, image-gradient alignment, SSIM, and color saturation terms. No perceptual or adversarial network is used. At inference, the renderer receives neither target pixels nor RGB history. A predicted-state rollout therefore exposes logic error to every camera, while a ground-truth state rendered by the same network isolates image-synthesis error.  

> Client-side prediction.

A client caches the latest versioned authoritative state. If server updates are temporarily missing, it initializes the same Logic Engine from that state and advances the full typed world locally. The full-input reference supplies the complete recorded joint-input stream. The deployable local-actions variant supplies the action of the evaluated player, assigns no-op actions to the other players, and uses empty future-spawn lists. Its predicted state becomes both the next recurrent input and the source of the local view. When a new authoritative version arrives, the client replaces the speculative state with that version and resumes normal rendering. Reconciliation uses the versioned typed state directly, without a separate correction network or a hidden RGB latent. Appendix C.4 measures how agreement changes as the update gap grows under full-state prediction. Transport scheduling and neighborhood prediction belong to the surrounding systems layer. 

# B The matched multiplayer benchmark 

B.1 Experimental protocol 

The matched benchmark tests whether a recurrent carrier preserves one recoverable world across two views. Direct state evaluation measures this property before rendering. Population-scale and cross-game studies test the same state and camera decomposition with different world sizes, camera counts, and visual domains.  

> Datasets and splits.

The matched benchmark contains multi-agent Snake trajectories on a 48 × 48 arena. The data are separated by episode. The training split has 128 episodes at each of N ∈ { 2, 4, 8 }, with 192 transitions per complete episode. Validation and test contain 16 and 32 episodes per population, respectively, with 160 transitions per episode. Direct logic evaluation uses the first eight complete validation episodes at every population, for 24 episodes in total. The end-to-end benchmark uses the N=2 subset required by the two-view game interface of MultiWorld [ 28 ]. Of the 128 training episodes, 126 provide the required 129 synchronized frames. The other two end earlier. Formal image evaluation uses the first eight complete test episodes, two synchronized camera views per episode, and a 128-tick rollout at 128 × 128. Every method starts from the same recorded state and initial images, follows the same recorded joint actions, and is scored against the same world and camera trajectories. Cameras are player centered with a 31-cell viewport. Their paths are fixed from the recorded reference state rather than recentered from the prediction of a method, so all methods are compared at identical view locations. The selected trajectories include food collection, growth, collisions, deaths, and interactions between nearby players. The compact cross-game state study changes only the codec and trajectories. Breakout provides 3,466 training and 855 validation transitions, while Tile Merger provides 5,729 and 1,916. Evaluation includes every eligible autoregressive window, yielding 220 Breakout and 900 Tile Merger windows through H = 128. The population-scale study uses separately generated Snake, Crate Pusher, and Pac-Man trajectories with 1,024 controlled entity slots and native exogenous tokens. Long rollouts start from held-out recorded states and reuse their action and exogenous streams for as long as a reference remains available. 16 Renderer datasets are split by source state trajectory. Each example contains one complete state, one camera tensor, and one target RGB frame. Ground-truth states supervise renderer training. Evaluation uses held-out states. For end-to-end figures, the renderer receives the Logic Engine’s predicted state instead of the ground-truth state, with no change to the renderer weights.  

> Baselines and fair comparison.

The matched benchmark compares five recurrent carriers. MultiWorld [ 28 ]is the publicly released coupled-view model, retrained from its official implementation on the matched Snake corpus. B-PV predicts each view independently and therefore has no shared recurrent object. B-SL advances one visual latent and decodes both views from it. B-UN replaces the typed carrier with a dense joint state U-Net while retaining the learned state-to-view path. MASS advances the canonical typed state and renders both cameras from that prediction. Table B.1 records the settings needed to interpret the comparison. All methods see the same training episodes, actions, camera paths, and 128-tick test protocol. The internal baselines and MASS use the same 20,000-update budget. MultiWorld follows the official 35-epoch optimization schedule on the same matched corpus. Parameter counts refer to the recurrent predictor when logic and rendering are separate. The MultiWorld entry reports trainable parameters in the adapted official model. B-UN is the controlled dense-state diagnostic for the representation question. It shares the matched trajectories, split, update budget, initialization, horizons, and metric code, but carries the world in a dense joint map. The comparison therefore tests whether a dense shared carrier can preserve sparse entity identity and position under recurrence.  

> Evaluation metrics.

Image-space metrics are computed from lossless RGB outputs. LPIPS measures perceptual distance between prediction and reference [ 30 ]. A frozen Snake parser maps each frame to a 31-by-31 grid of background, food, and entity labels plus the selected-player mask. Parser is the foreground-position F1 of this recovered grid. Count is exact entity-count accuracy per view, and Position is foreground-position recall. Event F1 compares foreground changes between successive overlapping view regions, so collection, growth, entry, and exit must occur at the correct location and time. The parser is evaluated on the native ground-truth frames before it is used on model output. Semantic evaluation is enabled only when its ground-truth state recovery is at least 0.99. The frozen parser passes this criterion on the matched test set. This check separates model error from parser error on the target rendering style. Cross-view disagreement aligns overlapping camera regions in world coordinates using the recorded camera origins. It counts parsed foreground cells whose semantic class differs between two simultaneous views, divided by the union of foreground cells in the overlap. The metric recovers content independently from each generated image before comparison. X-view measures agreement, while Parser, Count, Position, and Event F1 provide the complementary comparison with the reference world. Invalid is the fraction of parsed ticks that violate structural constraints such as a missing selected entity or an inconsistent recovered world. We interpret it jointly with Parser, Count, and Position so that structural validity and recoverable world content remain distinct measurements. Direct logic evaluation compares predicted typed fields with the recorded engine state before rendering. Semantic field accuracy averages canonical field correctness, Active restricts the score to populated fields, Position tracks entity anchors, Count tracks the number of decoded entities, and Full exact requires the complete canonical state to match. Structural validity checks only the declared representation constraints. State-Referenced Semantic Correctness, or SRSC, is an auxiliary RGB diagnostic inspired by calibrated vision and language evaluation [ 13 , 31 ]. It uses four paired comparisons, each written as an explicit (reference, candidate) tuple in the protocol details (§D.2). The Logic axis compares a teacher rendering of the ground-truth state with a teacher rendering of the predicted state. The Renderer-GT axis compares teacher and learned renderings of the same ground-truth state. The Renderer-Pred axis compares teacher and learned renderings of the same predicted state. The End-to-end axis compares a teacher rendering of the ground-truth state with a learned rendering of the prediction. The frozen judge is Qwen3.5-27B with deterministic greedy decoding (temperature 0) and a pinned seed, using the mean 0–100 score as 17 Table B.1 Matched benchmark configurations. Method Recurrent carrier Predictor parameters Training schedule Training context Output Test-time recurrence MASS typed token Transformer 5.66M 20k updates one transition canonical state                  

> +RGB greedy predicted state MultiWorld coupled multiview diffusion 5.60B trainable 35 epochs official video window two joint RGB views generated visual state B-PV independent video predictors 8.13M 20k updates 8 frames one RGB per view generated frames B-SL shared visual latent 12.72M 20k updates 8 frames two RGB views generated latent B-UN dense joint-state U-Net 3.69M 20k updates four transitions dense state +
> RGB raw predicted state

the reported metric. Its logic-axis score correlates with the programmatic state metric ( r = 0.962). SRSC localizes errors across the pipeline, while the deterministic metrics provide the quantitative conclusions. The population-scale Logic Engines use the same 256-wide, six-layer, eight-head architecture and AdamW recipe. Snake and Crate Pusher are evaluated at 20,000 updates. The Pac-Man run uses 100,000 updates. Records are shuffled and batched across worlds, and rare growth, death, and collection rows are sampled more frequently during training. Generation may split the records of one state into microbatches for memory, but all records are assembled before the next recurrent step. The learned renderers are trained from random initialization with AdamW, learning rate 2 × 10 −4, batch size 8, bfloat16 arithmetic, and gradient clipping at 1.0. We train the native-resolution Rendering Engine for 6,000 updates and the matched renderer for 20,000 updates. The selected checkpoint maximizes a held-out combination of PSNR, object PSNR, SSIM, and edge error. All reported inference frames use the learned checkpoint directly from a state and camera tensor, without target images, RGB history, or a native-renderer fallback. 

B.2 Matched Snake codec 

The matched end-to-end benchmark uses multi-agent Snake on a 48 × 48 arena with at most eight player slots. Its non-redundant canonical state contains the tick, 64 sorted food coordinates, and for each player an ordered body-coordinate list, length, heading, survival bit, and optional death anchor. The state occupies 421 tokens. The 447-token input prefix concatenates the current state, all player actions, and a compatibility payload of up to eight net-added food coordinates. The frozen corpus stores this compatibility payload through adjacent recorded states because it was collected before native exogenous-token recording. The payload records whether a spawn occurred. The matched Snake row evaluates this historical compatibility interface, while the population-scale studies use prospective engine-native randomness. The schema-generated decoder mask limits each field to its declared type and range. It also keeps food coordinates sorted and unique, prevents repeated coordinates within a body, and emits canonical padding. Body adjacency, legal movement, collision, growth, death, food consumption, and other transitions remain learned rather than encoded in the mask. The state metrics score their semantic accuracy separately from structural validity. We initialize the matched renderer randomly and train it for 20,000 updates on the frozen Snake trajectories at 128 × 128. 

B.3 Extended results on matched multiplayer Snake 

The main text reports aggregate performance after a 128-tick matched rollout. This section follows performance over time, evaluates the predicted state before rendering, and pairs states with renderers to separate the stages of the pipeline.  

> Performance over rollout horizon.

Figure B.1 reports the matched comparison over time. Every point averages the same eight held-out episodes and two synchronized views used by the main evaluation. The 18 curves separate properties that an endpoint image score can conflate, including recoverable world content, agreement between simultaneous views, and image fidelity to the reference. World recoverability separates the methods from the first predicted tick. MASS recovers 0.963 of the foreground state at that tick, while no baseline exceeds 0.19. Its score then declines smoothly to 0.642 at tick 128. MultiWorld loses most parsable content by tick 8, and B-UN begins near zero despite a comparatively low LPIPS. Appearance alone therefore does not reveal whether a recurrent carrier has preserved the entities that define the game. Count and position reveal complementary behavior. MASS achieves a position recall of 1.000 at tick 1 and 0.224 at tick 128. B-PV retains some isolated positions but does not maintain a coherent shared count, while B-UN quickly loses both. The LPIPS curve is smoother than the state curves for all methods. This disentangling explains why a visually plausible or low-distance frame can still represent a different interaction outcome. Cumulative Event F1 makes the interaction trend explicit. MASS starts at 0.841 and retains 0.702 through tick 32. The image predictors approach a similar endpoint Event F1 while their world recoverability remains below 0.15. Reading Event F1 together with parser and cross-view scores distinguishes event timing from recoverable entities and agreement between simultaneous views. Cross-view disagreement tests a different property from fidelity to the reference. The two observation-entangled baselines disagree on almost every foreground overlap throughout the rollout. MultiWorld approaches the same regime after tick 16. B-UN shares a dense state and therefore lowers disagreement, but its state contains little recoverable world content. MASS combines agreement with reference fidelity because both cameras decode one explicit prediction.  

> Direct logic evaluation.

The direct state study removes view synthesis and asks whether the recurrent carrier predicts the entities themselves. Table B.2 compares the typed Transformer with three dense-state diagnostics using the same trajectories, split, 20,000-update budget, initialization, horizons, and metric code. Evaluation covers 24 validation episodes, eight each at N ∈ { 2, 4, 8 }. Every model feeds its raw prediction back at the next step. The aggregate semantic score hides the difference in position accuracy. At one step, every dense predictor exceeds 91% semantic accuracy, yet none exceeds 2.7% position accuracy and every predicted tick is contradictory. The typed model reaches 99.1% position accuracy with no contradiction. At H = 32 it retains 90.2% position accuracy with no structural contradiction. Typed records therefore preserve entity persistence and local interaction outcomes through recurrent prediction. At N=8, the direct metrics separately resolve entity position and sparse simultaneous events such as multi-food updates. The typed carrier preserves entity identity and position while making event coordination measurable directly in state space.  

> Logic and rendering decomposition.

The explicit state interface supports a four-way comparison without changing the evaluated trajectory. A native or teacher renderer applied to the reference state provides the visual reference. Applying the learned renderer to that state isolates rendering. Applying the teacher renderer to the predicted state isolates logic in pixel space. Applying the learned renderer to the prediction gives the full rollout. Table B.3 implements the same decomposition with the SRSC semantic judge. The reference-state rows isolate renderer fidelity from recurrent state evolution. Crate Pusher reaches a mean renderer-ceiling score of 95.0 on ground-truth states. The corresponding Snake score has a mean of 69.0 and a sample standard deviation of 4.4 points across horizons. These stable reference-state results show rendering remains consistent when state quality is fixed. The remaining rows can therefore be interpreted through recurrent state evolution.  

> Joint interpretation.

The matched results separate visual similarity from recovery of entity state. B-UN preserves coarse appearance through a dense shared condition but loses entity position at the first logic step. MASS recurs on the same typed state used to decode both views, which preserves recoverability and cross-view agreement together. 19 0.0                     

> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> World recoverability  ↑
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Count accuracy  ↑
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Position recall  ↑
> 1816 32 64 128
> Rollout tick
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> LPIPS  ↓
> 1816 32 64 128
> Rollout tick
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Cross-view disagreement  ↓
> 1816 32 64 128
> Rollout tick
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Cumulative Event F1  ↑
> MASS MultiWorld B-PV B-SL B-UN Figure B.1

Performance over a 128-tick matched Snake rollout. Event F1 is cumulative through each horizon.  

> Table B.2

Direct state prediction on the matched Snake validation set. Carrier H Semantic ↑ Active ↑ Position ↑ Count ↑ Full exact ↑ Contradiction ↓

Independent-head CNN 1 95.1 82.4 2.7 100.0 0.0 100.0 32 91.0 64.3 0.1 100.0 0.0 100.0 128 88.9 42.7 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 Joint U-Net, B-UN 1 95.9 83.6 0.0 95.8 0.0 100.0 32 91.8 63.9 0.0 99.9 0.0 100.0 128 89.1 42.4 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 RSSM 1 91.2 77.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 32 87.2 61.5 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 128 84.7 40.6 0.0 100.0 0.0 100.0 MASS typed tokens 1 97.9 94.9 99.1 100.0 41.7 0.0 

32 90.8 65.7 90.2 100.0 0.0 0.0 

128 86.8 34.6 72.3 100.0 0.0 0.0 

B.4 Logic dynamics 

We compare the typed-token Transformer with three dense-state diagnostics, including a 3.26M independent-head CNN, a 3.86M RSSM with a learned state decoder, and a 3.69M joint U-Net. Every model uses identical trajectories, split, 20,000-update budget, rollout initialization, horizons, episodes, and metric code, and each feeds back its own raw prediction. The typed configuration uses the compatibility exogenous channel and one-step teacher forcing, while the dense configurations retain their earlier recorded recipes. The comparison therefore evaluates the complete carrier configurations. Evaluation covers 24 validation episodes, eight each at N ∈ { 2, 4, 8 }, and H ∈ { 1, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128 } with a fixed seed. The formal test split remains sealed for model selection. Table B.4 and figure B.2 summarize the recorded logic results over the rollout horizon. The typed representation separates positional continuity from aggregate field accuracy. At H = 1 it obtains 97.9% semantic, 94.9% active-field, and 99.1% head-position accuracy, while all dense predictors have at most 2.7% head-position accuracy. Its structural contradiction rate is zero, while every dense predictor is contradictory on every evaluated tick. At H = 32 it retains 90.8% semantic and 90.2% head-position accuracy with no collapse. The full-state exact score reaches 41.7% at H = 1, with one-step mismatches arising from simultaneous multi-food updates at N = 8 rather than structural contradictions. 20 Table B.3 SRSC decomposition of logic, rendering, and end-to-end error. Sample counts are reported in Table D.1. Game Comparison H=1 H=100 H=300 H=600 H=1200 Snake Logic 100.0 91.2 33.8 1.2 1.2 Renderer-Pred 53.8 76.9 60.6 48.8 30.6 End-to-end 55.6 51.2 31.2 7.5 2.5 Crate Pusher Logic 78.1 10.0 13.8 16.9 12.5 Renderer-Pred 78.8 7.5 0.0 12.5 5.0 End-to-end 69.4 5.0 0.0 5.0 2.5 Pac-Man Logic 100.0 60.0 10.0 N/A N/A Renderer-Pred 100.0 100.0 65.0 N/A N/A End-to-end 100.0 70.0 10.0 N/A N/A Snake Renderer-GT 68.8 71.2 63.8 75.0 66.2 Crate Pusher Renderer-GT 100.0 75.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 

Table B.4 Matched Snake logic results on a fixed validation seed. Values are percentages except latency.     

> Model Seeds HSemantic

↑ Active ↑ Position ↑ Count ↑ Attributes ↑ ID switch ↓ Contrad. ↓ Collapse ↓ Latency (ms) ↓                                                                                                                                                         

> Independent-head 1195.1 82.4 2.7 100.0 95.1 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.28 Independent-head 132 91.0 64.3 0.1 100.0 93.5 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.07 Independent-head 1128 88.9 42.7 0.0 100.0 91.8 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.40 Joint U-Net (dense ablation) 1195.9 83.6 0.0 95.8 94.9 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.92 Joint U-Net (dense ablation) 132 91.8 63.9 0.0 99.9 93.2 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.90 Joint U-Net (dense ablation) 1128 89.1 42.4 0.0 100.0 91.8 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.94 RSSM 1191.2 77.0 0.0 100.0 86.6 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.45 RSSM 132 87.2 61.5 0.0 100.0 83.6 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.47 RSSM 1128 84.7 40.6 0.0 100.0 82.1 0.0 100.0 0.0 3.42 Typed-token Transformer (ours) 1197.9 94.9 99.1 100.0 100.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.55 Typed-token Transformer (ours) 1894.6 83.4 94.6 100.0 99.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.55 Typed-token Transformer (ours) 116 93.6 77.0 92.0 100.0 98.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.55 Typed-token Transformer (ours) 132 90.8 65.7 90.2 100.0 98.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.55 Typed-token Transformer (ours) 164 88.8 52.5 85.7 100.0 96.7 1.8 0.0 0.0 45.55 Typed-token Transformer (ours) 1128 86.8 34.6 72.3 100.0 94.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.55

Additional runs clarify how the model responds to data weighting, token order, and training length. Extending the same-seed budget from 20,000 to 100,000 updates raises H = 1 exactness to 45.8% and head-position accuracy at H = 32 and H = 128 to 96.4% and 83.0%, respectively. Reordering player tokens before food raises H = 1 exactness from 41.7% to 45.8%, with H = 32 head-position accuracy changing from 90.2% to 80.4%. Weighting transitions by observed spawn count leaves H = 1 exactness unchanged and reduces active accuracy. We retain the uniform 20,000-update checkpoint for the matched comparison and report the other runs as fixed diagnostics rather than selecting metrics post hoc. 21 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11 8 16 32 64 128 Semantic state accuracy Rollout horizon Independent-head Joint U-Net (dense ablation) RSSM Typed-token Transformer (ours) 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11 8 16 32 64 128 Active-fi eld accuracy Rollout horizon 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11 8 16 32 64 128 Head-position accuracy Rollout horizon 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11 8 16 32 64 128 Contradictory-state rate Rollout horizon Figure B.2 Matched Snake validation curves under autoregressive feedback. 

# C Scaling and stability studies 

C.1 Cross-game results 

Keeping width 256, six layers, eight heads, batch size 8, 20,000 updates, and the seed fixed, we change only the declarative codec and game data. Breakout contributes 3,466 training and 855 validation transitions. Tile Merger contributes 5,729 and 1,916. Every validation window starts from its recorded state, feeds recorded actions and compatibility exogenous input, then feeds predicted states back through H = 128 (all 220 eligible Breakout and 900 eligible Tile Merger windows). Table C.1 reports the endpoint metrics. Figure C.1 shows their horizon trends, and figure C.2 shows predicted and reference states. The state sequences use the first validation window for each game in manifest order. Every prediction and reference pair uses the same initial state, action stream, and horizon, independent of visual quality. Breakout reaches 99.5% active-token accuracy and 84.5% full-state exactness at H = 1, and 85.7% active-token accuracy with 3.2% full-state exactness at H = 128. Every decode remains structurally valid. Tile Merger retains 72.5% active-token accuracy and structural validity at H = 128, while its full-state exact score is zero across the reported horizons. These results separate structural validity from stochastic-grid exactness and show the same interface supports closed-loop models for entity-table, ordered-entity, and stochastic-grid states. The Breakout and Tile Merger datasets use compatibility exogenous channels because their recorders precede engine-native exogenous tokens. Breakout uses a projection from the next tick, and Tile Merger uses the recorded spawn, making each logged transition deterministic. 

C.2 Rendering across games 

The cross-game study tests the shared state and camera interface across visual domains. Population-scale Snake, Crate Pusher, and Pac-Man pair 1,024-entity states with separately trained renderers. The interface stays fixed across changes in game geometry, object semantics, and appearance. 22 Table C.1 Typed-token state prediction across three games. Game Metric H State acc. Full exact Invalid Windows Snake Field semantic 1 97.9 41.7 0.0 24 Snake Field semantic 32 90.8 0.0 0.0 24 Snake Field semantic 128 86.8 0.0 0.0 24 Breakout Active token 1 99.5 84.5 0.0 220 Breakout Active token 32 97.0 43.2 0.0 220 Breakout Active token 128 85.7 3.2 0.0 220 Tile Merger Active token 1 90.6 0.0 0.0 900 Tile Merger Active token 32 77.3 0.0 0.0 900 Tile Merger Active token 128 72.5 0.0 0.0 900 1 8 16 32 64 128 

Autoregressive horizon H 

0

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

> Primary state accuracy (%)

Snake Breakout Tile Merger  

> Figure C.1 Held-out autoregressive state accuracy across three games.

The same state and camera contract is paired with separately trained 2D and 2.5D renderers. On held-out reference states, the two renderers obtain PSNR 33.54 and 30.12 with SSIM 0.9922 and 0.9855 for Snake. They obtain PSNR 35.38 and 34.39 with SSIM 0.9970 and 0.9898 for Crate Pusher. They obtain PSNR 34.88 and 32.72 with SSIM 0.9952 and 0.9795 for Pac-Man. These measurements isolate view synthesis from recurrent state prediction. All six renderers exceed SSIM 0.97 on reference states. The SRSC analysis separates this renderer quality from state evolution. Across the three population-scale games, the state and camera interface is shared, with game-specific weights for each renderer. 

C.3 Long-horizon stability 

Recorded Snake trajectories provide 159 reference transitions. We extend the horizon with a separate stress test from held-out initial states, using a fixed no-op action stream and explicit empty-spawn tokens. The test measures structural decodability, roster survival, collapse, and recurrence independently of a reference continuation. Table C.2 reports the endpoint measurements, and figure C.3 follows them over the rollout. Through H = 4096, populations 2, 4, and 8 retain full rosters, all 64 food slots, zero structurally invalid steps, and no collapse. The trajectories visit between 277 and 306 unique predicted states before entering a recurrent attractor, so state diversity complements the structural and collapse metrics. With the 100,000-23 Snake                                   

> GT H=1 Pred H=1
> Snake
> GT H=32 Pred H=32
> Snake
> GT H=128 Pred H=128
> Breakout
> Breakout
> Breakout
> Tile Merger
> 4
> 2
> 2
> 4
> 2
> 2
> Tile Merger
> 484
> 16 2
> 2
> 2
> 4824
> 16 2
> 2
> 2
> Tile Merger
> 2224
> 882
> 864 8
> 484
> 4432 8
> 2882
> 8232
> 416
> Same held-out initialization and recorded action stream

Figure C.2 Predicted and reference state sequences across three games. 

Table C.2 Long-horizon Snake results without ground-truth continuation. Run H Alive Unique states Invalid Latency ms 20k N=2 128 2 129 0.0 867.4 20k N=2 4096 2 277 0.0 774.2 20k N=4 128 4 129 0.0 834.2 20k N=4 4096 4 301 0.0 740.7 20k N=8 128 8 129 0.0 866.0 20k N=8 4096 8 306 0.0 764.9 

update checkpoint, two initializations produce 1,850 and 302 unique states. The longer training run can substantially extend diverse evolution, while the difference between starts shows the effect of initialization. 

C.4 Large-scale and asynchronous rollouts 

The Logic Engine advances one shared world, after which the Rendering Engine serves the requested cameras from that prediction. We evaluate these stages with 1,024 entities and during short gaps in authoritative updates. 

One world transition and many view requests. The selected Snake state contains 1,024 player records, 4,096 food bucket records, and one global record. The Logic Engine therefore predicts 5,121 records once per world tick. A controlled renderer sweep on one NVIDIA H100 then fixes the predicted state at tick 140 and simulates client-side rendering for varying numbers of requested views over Cr ∈ { 1, 4, 16, 64, 256, 1024 }.The measured renderer cost grows from a mean of 189.6 ms for one requested view to 842.4 ms for 1,024 requested views. The learned CNN component grows from 4.4 ms to 379.7 ms over the same sweep. Increasing the number of requested views changes the rendering workload while leaving the learned world transition unchanged. The cameras query one prediction rather than maintaining separate recurrent worlds. 

Client prediction under missing updates. We simulate an authoritative update stall in the 1,024-entity Snake rollout. Windows begin at three held-out anchors and last from one to eight ticks. One condition supplies the complete recorded joint-input stream. The second supplies only the action of the evaluated player, assigns no-op actions to the other players, and withholds future food spawns. Both conditions advance the complete typed state from the last authoritative update. 24 20 22 24 26 28 210 212 

> stress horizon H
> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
> 4000
> unique predicted states

State diversity plateaus       

> 20k N=2
> 20k N=4
> 20k N=8
> 100k N=8 e0
> 100k N=8 e1
> no repeats
> 2022242628210 212
> stress horizon H
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> alive entities

Roster survives with zero invalid states Figure C.3 Structural validity, roster survival, and state diversity through H = 4096 on Snake. 

With complete joint inputs, the local rollout matches the authoritative in-view state in all 24 windows. With only the local action, the selected avatar remains exact in all 24 windows while unseen actions and events progressively alter the surrounding world. The shared state therefore supports exact local continuation when the required world inputs are known and keeps local responsiveness distinct from prediction of unobserved global events. 

# D Netcode and diagnostics 

D.1 Client prediction 

When a server update is delayed, the client continues to render frames by advancing its latest authoritative state locally. This section measures how well that local prediction holds up before the next server state arrives.  

> Setup.

The evaluation uses Snake at N = 1024 with the same 256 × 6 × 8 typed-token Logic Engine used in the main experiments. For each held-out episode, three anchor ticks ( t ∈ { 100, 300, 600 }) serve as the last received authoritative state. From each anchor, the client advances the full typed state for up to k = 8 ticks, then compares every predicted tick against the recorded authoritative state at the same tick.  

> Variants.

The oracle joint-input variant supplies the local simulation with every player’s recorded action and the recorded exogenous spawns. It isolates the transition accuracy when the complete input stream is available. The client variant supplies only the evaluated client’s recorded actions, extrapolates the other 1,023 players with no-op actions, and leaves spawn lists empty. All other token fields, including the tick counter, retain their recorded values.  

> Metrics.

In-view agreement is the multiset intersection-over-union of visible (kind , x, y) objects between the predicted and authoritative states, both projected through the authoritative camera of the evaluated client. Own-avatar displacement is the L1 distance between the predicted and authoritative head positions of the evaluated client. Each agreement value at a given k averages the three authoritative anchors.  

> Interpretation.

The oracle joint-input variant holds agreement 1.000 through k = 8 at every anchor. Within a 400 ms window the learned transition contributes no in-view divergence, so the client variant’s decay (0.815 at k = 1 to 0.429 at k = 8) measures the effect of unknown remote inputs and withheld exogenous spawns, which reconciliation corrects when a new server state arrives. Under the evaluated anchors the local avatar incurs zero displacement, so no position correction is needed for that player when the next server state arrives. 25 Execution regime. The client test advances the full typed state. At the matched two-player scale, the transition takes 45.6 ms and fits a 20 Hz tick budget. At N = 1024, the timing corresponds to a full-state step on one GPU. System-level concerns such as neighborhood projection, transport policy, and wall-clock optimization are not varied in this correctness measurement. 

D.2 SRSC protocol and results 

Standard image metrics such as PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS measure pixel-level or perceptual similarity, but a frame that looks similar to the reference can still be semantically wrong, with incorrect entity counts, positions, identities, or interaction outcomes. Conversely, a rendered frame that differs in style or sharpness may be semantically correct. State-Referenced Semantic Correctness (SRSC) fills this gap by using a vision-language model (VLM) to judge whether the semantic content of a rendered frame matches the reference, independent of appearance.  

> Evaluation axes.

A key advantage of MASS’s architecture is that the explicit typed state lets us evaluate the Logic Engine and Rendering Engine separately. Video-based world models entangle dynamics and appearance in a shared visual latent, and do not expose a comparable explicit interface for separating errors in world transition from errors in view synthesis. Because MASS predicts a typed state before rendering, we can replace either component with its ground-truth counterpart and isolate the source of degradation. This gives four axes, each written as (reference, candidate). • Logic axis :reference = teacher render of the ground-truth state st,candidate = teacher render of the predicted state ˆst. Both sides use the same teacher (reference) renderer, so any semantic difference is caused by the Logic Engine. • Renderer-GT axis :reference = teacher render of st,candidate = learned render of st. Both sides condition on the same ground-truth state, isolating the Rendering Engine’s contribution without contamination from state error. • Renderer-Pred axis :reference = teacher render of ˆ st,candidate = learned render of ˆst. Both sides condition on the same predicted state, isolating the Rendering Engine’s contribution under the typical (degraded) input distribution. • End-to-end axis :reference = teacher render of st,candidate = learned render of ˆst. A full learned rollout frame is compared against the teacher reference. This measures the complete pipeline.  

> Protocol and prompt.

The VLM judge is Qwen3.5-27B served with tensor parallelism. The reference image is a symbolic semantic raster where each cell is colored by entity type (e.g., snake head, body, food, wall, empty), entity identity (player index), and team affiliation, with positions given by the raster cell coordinates. The candidate image is either a learned-renderer RGB frame or a symbolic raster of the predicted state, depending on the axis. The VLM receives the following prompt. 

> You are a semantic game-state judge. Two images are provided: REFERENCE (ground-truth symbolic raster) and CANDIDATE (learned render or predicted-state raster). 1. For each image separately, inventory every visible entity by class (snake head, body, food, wall, empty, ...), identity

26 (player index), team, and owner. 2. Assign each entity to a coarse spatial sector (left/center/right, top/middle/bottom) and note relative spatial relations. 3. Establish correspondence between the two inventories. 4. Check object states (alive/dead, moving/stationary), interactions (collision, collection), and list any hallucinated or missing entities. Ignore differences in artistic style, texture, lighting, and image sharpness. Focus only on semantic content: what entities exist, where they are, and what state they are in. Return a JSON object with exactly these fields: - "consistent": true or false - "score": integer 0-100 - "mismatches": array of {"type": str, "description": str} (allowed types: missing_entity, hallucinated_entity, wrong_position, wrong_identity, wrong_team, wrong_object_state, wrong_interaction, wrong_geometry, uncertain_or_occluded) - "brief_reason": short auditable summary 

The VLM returns a structured JSON response with four fields • consistent (boolean): whether the semantic content agrees; • score (integer, 0–100): confidence-weighted semantic agreement; • mismatches (array): enumerated discrepancies drawn from a fixed taxonomy (missing entity, hallu-cinated entity, wrong position, wrong identity, wrong team, wrong object state, wrong interaction, wrong geometry, uncertain or occluded) • brief_reason (string): auditable summary of the inventory and correspondence. The table below reports the mean SRSC score (average of the score field, range 0–100). The binary version (SRSC_binary , fraction of frames where consistent=true ) is not used in this report because the finite sample sizes would produce overly coarse granularity. The mean score provides a more informative comparison. The “Pairs” column in the table lists the image-pair count and binary denominator for each axis. Each evaluation uses deterministic greedy decoding (temperature 0) with a pinned random seed ( 20260722 ). The structured JSON response schema enforces the exact field set, and every response is validated against that schema before it enters the aggregate. The prompt, schema, taxonomy, visualizer specification, judge model snapshot, and service endpoint are recorded and hashed before evaluation begins, and any change invalidates the protocol binding. The “Scenes” column reports the number of independent starting states (episode–timestep combinations) sampled for each axis. “Pairs” is the total number of (reference, candidate) image pairs presented to the VLM. The Logic axis uses one pair per scene (teacher vs. teacher rendering of the same world), while axes that involve rendering use two pairs per scene (two camera viewpoints). Percentages in the table are the mean of the 0–100 score field. 

Results. The SRSC mean scores are reported in Table D.1. On Snake, the Logic axis stays above 90% through 

H=100 and degrades gradually at longer horizons. The Renderer-Pred axis holds moderate scores across all horizons (30–77%), while the end-to-end scores follow the Logic axis decay. On Crate Pusher, all axes drop faster, reflecting the higher interaction density in that game. On Pac-Man, the Renderer-Pred axis remains high (100% at H=1 and 65% at H=300), while the Logic and end-to-end scores decay with horizon. The bottom rows report a control condition (Renderer-GT axis), where the renderer conditioned on ground-truth states—a setting that removes the Logic Engine entirely—achieves near-perfect or high scores at all horizons without a clear monotonic decline. This indicates that the Rendering Engine itself does not accumulate 27 Table D.1 SRSC results for logic, rendering, and end-to-end predictions. Pac-Man ends at H = 300. Game Axis Scenes H=1 H=100 H=300 H=600 H=1200 Pairs Snake Logic 20 100.0 91.2 33.8 1.2 1.2 20 Renderer-Pred 20 53.8 76.9 60.6 48.8 30.6 40 End-to-end 20 55.6 51.2 31.2 7.5 2.5 40 Crate Pusher Logic 20 78.1 10.0 13.8 16.9 12.5 20 Renderer-Pred 20 78.8 7.5 0.0 12.5 5.0 40 End-to-end 20 69.4 5.0 0.0 5.0 2.5 40 Pac-Man Logic 6 100.0 60.0 10.0 N/A N/A 6Renderer-Pred 6 100.0 100.0 65.0 N/A N/A 12 End-to-end 6 100.0 70.0 10.0 N/A N/A 12 

Renderer-GT axis (pure renderer isolation, Logic Engine removed) 

Crate Pusher Renderer-GT 10 100.0 75.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 10 Snake Renderer-GT 10 68.8 71.2 63.8 75.0 66.2 10 

semantic error with rollout horizon when the input state is held correct, and that the decay observed in the full pipeline originates primarily in the learned dynamics rather than in rendering. The Renderer-GT results suggest that the Rendering Engine does not accumulate substantial semantic drift over the evaluated horizons. The scores fluctuate between 63.8 and 75.0 without a monotonic decline. Their offset from the symbolic-raster ceiling reflects the representational gap between a categorical semantic raster and a learned RGB rendering rather than temporal accumulation. This separation of concerns is enabled by MASS’s typed-state interface. 28